Montaigne's Essays Volume II


Source: Michel Montaigne. The Essays of Michael Lord of Montaigne,
1580, 1597. Translated by John Florio, 1603. World's Classics
edition. 3 volumes, Vol. 2. London: Frowde, 1904. Before using any
portion of this text in any theme, essay, research paper, thesis, or
dissertation, please read the disclaimer.

Archaic spellings: If you are puzzled by the spelling of a word, try
these remedies.

Replace u with v (giue = give)

Replace i with j (obiect = object)

Replace y with i (Englyshe = English)

Remove the final e (Englyshe = English)

CHAPTER 2.I+ OF THE INCONSTANCIE OF OUR ACTIONS

THose which exercise themselves in controuling humane actions, finde
no such let in any one part as to peece them together and bring them
to one same lustre: For they commonly contradict one another so
strangely, as it seemeth impossible they should be parcels of one
Warehouse. Young Marias is sometimes found to be the sonne of Mars,
and other times the childe of Venus.  Pope Boniface the Eight is
reported to have entred into his charge as a Fox, to have carried
himselfe therein as a Lion, and to have died like a Dog.  And who
would thinke it was Nero, that lively image of cruelty, who being
required to sign (as the custome was) the sentence of a criminall
offender that had beene condemned to die, that ever he should answer,
'Oh would to God I could never have written?  So neare was his heart
grieved to doome a man to death.  The wo rld is so full of such
examples that every man may store himselfe; and I wonder to see men of
understanding trouble themselves with sorting these parcels: Sithence
(mee seemeth) irresolution is the most apparent and common vice of our
nature: as witnesseth that famous verse of Publius the Commedian:

  Malum consilium est, quod mutari non potest./1


  The counsel is but bad,

  Whose change may not be had.


There is some apparence to judge a man by the most common conditions
of his life but seeing the naturall instability of our customes and
opinions, I have often thought that even good Authors doe ill and take
a wrong course, wilfully to opinionate themselves about framing a
constant and solide contexture of us.  They chuse an universal ayre,
and following that image, range and interpret all a mans actions;
which if they cannot wrest sufficiently, they remit them unto
dissimulation. Augustus hath escaped their hands; for there is so
apparent, so sudden and continual a variety of actions found in him
through the course of his life, that even the boldest Judges and
strictest censurers have beene faine to give him over, and leave him
undecided.  There is nothing I so hardly beleeve to be in man as
constancie+, and nothing so easie to be found in him, as inconstancy.
He that should distinctly and part by part judge of him, should often
jumpe to speake truth.  View all antiquity over, and you shall finde
it a hard matter to chuse out of a dozen of men that have directed
their life unto one certaine, setled, and assured course; which is the
surest drift of wisdome.  For to comprehend all in one word, saith an
ancient writer, and to embrace all the rules of our life into one, it
is at all times to will, and not to will one same thing.  I would not
vouchsafe (saith he) to adde anything: alwayes provided the will be
just: for, if it be unjust, it is impossible it should ever continue
one.  Verily, I have heretofore learned that vice is nothing but a
disorder and want of measure, and by consequence it is impossible to
fasten constancy unto it.  It is a saying of Demosthenes (as some
report) that consultation and

----- 1 PUBLIUS.  Mim. ap.  AUL.  GELL. l. xvii. c. 14.

deliberation is the beginning of all virtue, and constancie the end
and perfection.  If by reason or discourse we should take a certaine
way, we should then take the fairest: but no man hath thought on it.

  Quod petiit, spernit, repetit quod nuper omisit

  AEstuat, et vitae disconvenit ordine toto./1


  He scornes that which he sought, seek's that he scorn'd of late,

  He flowes, ebbes, disagrees in his lifes whole estate.

Our ordinary manner is to follow the inclination of our appetite this
way and that way, in the left and on the right hand; upward and
downeward, according as the winde of occasions doth transport us: we
never thinke on what we would have, but at the instant we would have
it: and change as that beast that takes the colour of the place
wherein it is laid.  What we even now purposed we alter by and by, and
presently returne to out former biase; all is but changing, motire,
and inconstancy:

  Ducimur ut nervis alienis mobile lignum./2


  So are we drawne, as wood is shoved,

  By others sinnewes each way moved.

We goe not, but we are carried: as things that flote, now gliding
gently, now hulling violently, according as the water is, either
stormy or calme.

  ----- nonne videmus

  Quid sibi quisque relit nescire et quaerere semper,

  Commuttare locum quasi onus deponere possit? /3


  See we not, every man in his thoughts height

  Knowes not what he would have, yet seekes he streight

  To change place, as he could lay downe his weight?

  Every day new toyes, each hour new fantasies, and our humours move
  and fleet with the fleetings and movings of time.


----- 1 HOR. 1. i.  Epist. i. 98. 2 HOR. 1. ii.  Sat. vii. 82. 3
LUCRET. 1. iii. 1070.

  Tales sunt hominum mentes, quali Pater ipse

  Jupiter auctifero lustravit lumine terras./1


  Such are mens mindes, as that great God of might

  Surveies the earth with encrease bearing light.

We float and waver betweene divers opinions: we will nothing freely,
nothing absolutely, nothing constantly.  Had any man prescribed
certaine Lawes or established assured policies in his owne head, in
his life should we daily see to shine an equality of customes, an
assured order and an infallible relation from one thing to another
(Empedocles noted this deformitie to he amongstthe Agrigentines, that
they gave themselves so over unto delights as if they should die to
morrow next, and built as if they should never die) the discourse
thereof were easie to be made. As is seene in young Cato: He that
toucht but one step of it hath touched all.  It is an harmoony of well
according tunes and which cannnot contradict it selfe.  With us it is
clean contrarie, so many actions, so many particular judgements are
there required.  The surest way (in mine opinion) were to refer them
unto the next circumstances, without entering into further search, and
without concluding any other consequence of them.  During the late
tumultuous broiles of our mangled estate, it was told me that a young
woman not farre from mee had headlong cast her selfe out of a high
window, with intent to kill herselfe, only to avoid the ravishment of
a rascally-base souldier that lay in her house, who offered to force
her: and perceiving that with the fall she had not killed herselfe, to
make an end of her enterprize she would have cut her owne throat with
a knife, but that she was hindered by some that came into her:
Neverthelesse having sore wounded herselfe, she voluntarily confessed
that the souldier had yet but urged her with importunate requests,
suing solicitations, and golden bribes, but she feared he would in the
end have obtained his purpose by compulsion: by whose earnest
speeches,

----- 1 CIC.  Fragm.

resolute countenance, and gored bloud (a true testimony of her chaste
vertue) she might appeare to be the lively patterne of another
Lucrece, yet know I certainly that, both before that time and
afterward, she had beene enjoyed of others upon easier composition.
And as the common saying is; Faire and soft, as squemish-honest as she
seemes, although you misse of your intent, conclude not rashly an
inviolable chastitie to be in your Mistresse; for a groome or a
horse-keeper may finde an houre to thrive in; and a dog hath a day.
Antigonus having taken upon him to favour a souldier of his by reason
of his vertue and valour, to have great care of him, and see whether
they could recover him of a lingering and inward disease which had
long tormented him, who being perfectly cured, he afterward perceiving
him to be nothing so earnest and diligent in his affaires, demanded of
him how he was so changed from himselfe, and become so cowardish:
'Your selfe,h good sir,' answered he, 'have made me so by ridding me
of those infirmities which so did grieve me that I made no accompt of
my life.  A souldier of Lucullus, having by his enemies beene robbed
of all he had, to revenge himselfe undertooke a notable and desperat
atempt upon them; and having recovered his losses, Lucullus conceived
a very good opinion of him, and with the greatest shewes of assured
trust and loving kindnesse be could bethinke himselfe, made especiall
accompt of him, and in any dangerous enterprize seemed to trust and
employ him only:

  Verbis qum timido quoque possent addere mentem./1


  With words, which to a coward might

  Adde courage, had he any spright.

"Imploy," said he unto him, "some wretch-stripped and robbed
Souldier,"

----- 1 HOR. 1.ii.  Epist. ii. 34.

  ----- quantumvis rusticus ibit,

  Ibit eo quo vis, qui zonam perdidit, inquit./1


  None is, saith he, so clownish, but will-on,

  Where you will have him, if his purse be gone

and absolutely refused to obey him.  When we reade that Mahomet,
having outrageously rated Chasan, chiefe leader of his Janizers,
because he saw his troup wel-nigh defeated by the Hungarians, and hee
to behave himselfe but faintly in the fight, Chasan without making
other reply alone as he was, and without more adoe, with his weapon in
his hand rushed furiously in the thickest throng of his enemies that
he first met withall, of whom he was instantly slaine: This, may haply
be deemed rather a rash conceit than a justification, and a new spight
than a naturall prowes.  He whom you saw yesterday so boldly
venturous, wonder not if you see him a daastardly meacocke to morrow
next: for either anger or necessitie, company or wine, a sudden fury
or the clang of a trumpet, might rowse-up his heart and stir up his
courage.  It is no heart nor courage so framed by discourse- or
deliberation: These circumstances have setled the same in him:
Therefore it is no marvell if by other contrary circumstance he become
a craven and change coppy. This supple variation and easie yeelding
contradiction which is scene in us, hath made some to imagine that wee
had two soules, and others two faculties; whereof every one as best
she pleaseth, accompanieth and doth agitate us; the one towards good,
the other towards evill.  Forsomuch as such a rough diversitie cannot
wel sort and agree in one simple subject.  The blast of accidents doth
not only remove me according to his inclination; for, besides, I
remove and trouble my selfe by the instability of my posture, and
whosoever looketh narrowly about himselfe, shall hardly see himselfe
twice in the same state.  Sometimes I give my soule one visage and
sometimes another, according unto the posture or side I lay her in.
If I speake diversly of

---- --- 1 HOR. 1. ii.  Epist. ii. 37.

selfe it is because I looke diversly upon my selfe.  All contrarieties
are found in her, according to some turne or removing, and in some
fashion or other; shamefast, bashfull, insolent, chaste, luxurious,
peevish, pratling, silent, fond, doting, labourious, nice, delicate,
ingenious, slow, dull, froward, humorous, debonaire, wise, ignorant,
false in words, true-speaking, both liberall, covetous, and
prodigall. [characters] All these I perceive in some measure or other
to bee in mee, according as I stirre or turne my selfe; And whosoever
shall heedfully survey and consider himselfe, shall finde this
volubility and discordance to be in himselfe, yea and in his very
judgement.  I have nothing to say entirely, simply, and with soliditie
of my selfe, without confusion, disorder, blending, mingling, and in
one word, Distinguo is the most universall part of my logike.
Although I ever purpose to speak good of good, and rather to enterpret
those things that will beare it, unto a good sense; yet is it that the
strangenesse of our condition admitteth that we are often urged to doe
well by vice it selfe, if well doing were not judged by the intention
only.  Therefore may not a courageous act conclude a man to be
valiant.  He that is so, when just occasion serveth, shall ever be so,
and upon all occasions.  If it were an habitude of vertue, and not a
sudden humour, it would make a man equally resolute at all assayes, in
all accidents: Such alone, as in company; such in a single combat, as
in a set battel: For, whatsoever some say, valour is all alike, and
not one in the street or towne, and another in the campe or field.  As
courageously should a man beare a sicknesse in his hed as a hurt in
the field, and feare death no more at home in his house than abroad in
an assault.  We should not then see one same man enter the breach, or
charge his enemie with an assured and undouted fiercenesse, and
afterward having escaped that, to vexe, to grive and torment himselfe
like unto a seely woman, or faint- hearted milkesop for the losse of a
sute, or death of a childe.  If one chance to be carelesly base-minded
in his infancie, and constantly-resolute in povertie; if he be
timorously-fearfull at sight of a barbers razor, and afterward
stowtly-undismayed against his enemies swords: the action is
commendable, but not the man.  Divers Grecians (saith Cicero) cannot
endure to looke their enemy in the face, yet are they most constant in
their sicknesses; whereas the Cimbrians and Celtiberians are meere
contrary. Nihil enim potest esse aequabile, quod non a certa ratione
proficiscatur:/1 'For nothing can beare it selfe even which proceedeth
not from resolved reason.  There is no valor more extreme in his kinde
than that of Alexander; yet it is but in species, nor every where
sufficiently full and universall. As incomparable as it is, it hath
his blemishes, which is the reason that in the idleest of suspitions
he apprehendeth at the conspiracies of his followers against his life,
we see him so earnestly to vex and trouble ^himselfe: In search and
pursuit of whereof he demeaneth himselfe with so vehement and
indiscreet an injustice, and with such a demisse feare that even his
naturall reason is thereby subverted.  Also the superstition wherewith
he is so thoroughly tainted beareih some shew of pusilanimitie. And
the unlimited excesse of the repentance he shewed for the murther of
Clitus is also a witnesse of the inequalitie of his courage.  Our
matters are but parcels hudled up and peeces patched together, and we
endevour to acquire honour by false meanes and untrue tokens.  Vertue
will not bee followed but by herselfe: and if at any time we borrow
her maske, upon some other occasion she will as soone pull it from our
face.  It is a lively hew and strong die, if the soule be once dyed
with the same perfectly, and which will never fade or be gone, except
it carry the skin away with it.  Therefore to judge a man, we must a
long time follow, and very curiously marke his steps; whether
constancie do wholy subsist and continue upon her owne foundation in
him.  Cui vivendi via considerata atque provisa est./2 'Who hath
forecast and considered the way of

----- 1 CIC.  Tusc.  Qu. ii. c. 27. 2 CIC.  Parad. v.


life;' whether the variety of occurrences make him change his pace (I
meane his way, for his pace may either be hastened or slowed) let him
run on: such a one (as sayeth the imprease of our good Talbot) goeth
before the wind.  It is no marvell (saith an old writer) that hazard
hath such power over us, since wee live by hazard.  It is impossible
for him to dispose of his particular actions, that bath not in grose
directed his life unto one certaine end.  It is impossible for him to
range all peeces in order, that hath not a plot or forme of the totall
frame in his head.  What avayleth the provision of all sorts of
colours unto one that knowes not what be is to draw?  No man makes any
certaine designe of his life, and we deliberate of it but by parcels.
A skilfull archer ought first to know the marke he aimeth at, and then
apply his hand, his bow, his string, his arrow and his motion
accordingly.  Our counsels goe a stray because they are not rightly
addressed, and have no fixed end.  No winde makes for him that hath no
intended post to saile unto.  As for me, I allow not greatly of that
judgement which some made of Sophocles, and to have concluded him
sufficient in the managing of domesticall matters, against the
accusation of his owne sonne, only by the sight of one of his
tragedies.  Nor doe I commend the conjecture of the Parians sent to
reforme the Milesians, as sufficient to the consequence they drew
thence.  In visiting and surveying the ile, they marked the landes
that were best husbanded, and observed the country houses that were,
best governed.  And having registered the names of their owners, and
afterward made an assembly of the Townesmen of the Citie, they named
and instituted those owners as new Governours and Magistrates, judging
and concluding, that being good husbands and carefull of their
housebold affaires, they must consequently be so of publike matters.
We are all framed of flaps and patches and of so shapelesse and
diverse a contexture that every peece and every moment playeth his
part.  And there is as much difference found betweene us and our
selves as there is betweene ourselves and other.  Magnam rem puta,
unun hominem agere: 'Esteeme it a great matter to play but one man.
Since ambition may teach men both valor temperance, liberality, yea
and justice: sith covetousnesse may settle in the minde of a
Shop-prentise-boy, brought up in ease and idlenesse, a dreadlesse
assurance to leave his home-bred ease, and forgoe his place of
education, and in a small barke to yeeld himselfe unto the mercy of
blustring waves, mercilesse windes and wrathfull Neptune; and that it
also teacheth discretion and wisdome [Crusoe]; And that Venus
[Mars/Venus] herself ministreth resolution and hardinesse unto tender
youth as yet subject to the discipline of the rod, and teacheth the
ruthlesse Souldier the soft and tenderly effeminate heart of women in
their mothers laps:

  Hac duce custodes furtim transgressa jacentes, Adjuvenem tenebris
  sola puella venit./1

  The wench by stealeth her lodg'd guards having stript,

  By this guide, sole, i'th darke, to' th yonker skipt;

It is no part of a well-grounded judgement simply to judge ourselves
by our exterior actions: A man must into his heart, and there see by
what wards or springs the motions stirre.  But forsomuch as it is a
hazardous and high enterprise, I would not have so many to meddle with
it as doe.

----- 1 TIB. 1. ii.  Eleg. i. 75.

  
CHAPTER 2.II+ OF DRUNKENESSE


THE world is nothing but variety and dissemblance.  Vices are all
alike, inasmuch as they are all vices: And so do haply the Stoikes
meane it.  But though they are equally vices, they are not equall
vices; and that hee who hath started a hundred steps beyond the limits

  Quos ultra citraque nequit consistere rectum,/l

  On this side, or beyond the which

  No man can hold a right true pitch

is not of worse condition than he that is ten steps short of it, is no
whit credible: and that sacrilege is not worse than the stealing of a
colewort out of a garden.

  Nec vincet ratio, tantumdem ut peccet, idemque, Qui teneros caules
  alieni fregerit horti,

  Et qui nocturnus divum sacra legerit./2

  No reason can evict, as great or same sinne taints

  Him that breakes in anothers Garden tender plants,

  And him that steales by night things consecrate to Saints.

There is as much diversity in that as in any other thing.  The
confusion of order and measure of crimes is dangerous: Murtherers,
Traitors and Tyrants, have too much gaine by it: it is no reason their
conscience should be eased, in that some other is either idle or
lascivious, or lesse assiduous unto devotion.  Every man poiseth upon
his fellowes sinne, and elevates his owne.  Even teachers do often
range it ill in my conceit. As Socrates said, that the chiefest office
of wisdome was to distinguish goods and evils.  We

----- 1 HOR. 1. i.  Sat. i. 107. 2 Ib. iii. 115.

others, to whom the best is ever in vice, should say the like of
knowledge to distinguish vices, without which, and that very exacet,
both vertuous and wicked men remaine confounded and unknowen.  Now
drunkennesse amongst others appeareth to me a grose and brutish vice.
The minde hath more part else where; and some vices there are which
(if it may lawfully be spoken) have a kinde of I wot not what
generosity in them.  Some there are that have learning, diligence,
valour, prudence, wit, cunning, dexterity, and subtlety joyned with
them; whereas this is meerely corporall and terrestriall. And the
grosest and rudest nation that liveth amongst us at this day is only
that which keepeth it in credit.  Other vices but alter and distract
the understanding, whereas this utterly subverteth the same, and
astonieth the body.

  ----- Cum vini vis penetravit,

  Consequitur qravitas membrorum, praepediuntur

  Crura vacillanti, tardescit lingua madet mens,

  Nant oculi, clamor, singultus,jurgia gliscunt.1

  When once the force of wine hath inly pierst,

  Limbes-heavinesse is next, legs faine would goe,

  But reeling cannot, tongue drawles, mindes disperst,

  Eyes swimme, cries, hickups, brables grow.

The worst estate of man is where he loseth the knowledge and
government of himselfe.  And amongst other things it is said that as
must wine boyling and working in a vessel, workes and sends upwards
what ever, it containeth in the bottom, so doth wine cause those that
drink excessively of it to worke up and break out their most concealed
secrets.

  ----- tu sapientium

  Curas, et arcanum jocoso


  Consilium retegis Lyaeo./2

 
  Thou (wine-cup) doest by wine reveale

  The cares, which wise men would conceale

  And close drifts, at a merry meale.

----- 1 LUCRET. 1. iii. 479. 2 HOR. 1. iii.  Od. xxi. 14.


Josephus reporteth that by making an Ambassador to tipple- square,
whom his enemies had sent unto him, he wrested all his secrets out of
him.  Neverthelesse Augustus having trusted Lucius Piso, that
conquered Thrace, with the secretest affaires he had in hand, had
never cause to be discontented with him; nor Tiberius with Cossus, to
whom he imparted all his seriousest counsels, although we know them
both to have so given themselves to drinking of wine that they were
often faine to be carried from the Senat, and both were reputed
notable drunkards.

  ----- Hesterno inflatum venas de more Lyaeo/1

  Veines pufft up, as it used alway

  By wine which was dranke yesterday.


And as faithfully as the complot and purpose to kill Caesar committed
unto Cimber, who would daily be drunke with quaffing of wine, as unto
Cassius, that drunke nothing but water, whereupon he answered very
pleasantly, 'What! shall I bear a tyrant that am not able to beare
wine?  We see our carowsing tospot German souldiers, when they are
most plunged in their cups and as drunke as rats, to have perfect
remembrance of their quarter, of the watchword, and of their files.

  ----- Nec facilis victoria de madidis, et

  Bloesis, atque mero titubantibus./2

  Nor is the conquest easie of men sowst,

  Lisping and reeling with wine they carowst.


I would never have beleeved so sound, so deepe and so excessive
drunkennesse had I not read in histories that Attalus having envited
to sup with him (with intent to doe him some notable indignity) the
same Pausanias who for the same cause killed afterward Philip, King of
Macedon (a king, who by the eminent faire qualities that were in him,
bore a testimonie of the education he had learned in the house and
company of 1 VIRG.  Buc.  Ecl. vi. 152 2 JUV.  Sat. xv. 47.
Epaminondas), made him so dead-drunke that insensibly and without
feeling he might prostitute his beauty as the body of a common
hedge-harlot, to Mulettiers, Groomes and maany of the abject servants
of his house.  And what a lady (whom I much honour and highly esteeme)
told mee , protesting that neere Bourdeaux, towards Castres, where her
house is, a widdow country-woman, reputed very chaste and honest,
suspecting herselfe to be with childe, told her neighbours that had
she a husband she should verily thinke she was with childe; but the
occasion of this suspition increasing more and more, and perceiving
herseIfe so big-bellied that she could no longer conceale it, she
resolved to make the Parish-priest acquainted with it, whom she
entreated to publish in the Church that whosover hee were that were
guilty of the fact, and would avow it, she would freely forgive him,
and if hee were so pleased, take him to her husband.  A certaine
swaine or hyne-boy of hers, emboldened by this proclamation, declared
how that having one holliday found her welltippled with wine, and so
sound asleep by the chimnie side lying so fit and ready for him,
without awaking her he had the full use of her body.  Whom she
accepted for her husband, and both live together at this day.  It is
assured that antiquitie hath not greatly described this vice.  The
compositions of diverse Philosophers speake but sparingly of it.  Yea,
and some of the Stoikes deeme it not amisse for man sometimes to take
his liquor roundly, and drinke drunke, thereby to recreate his
spirits.

  Hoc quoque virtutum quondam certamine magnum

  Socratem palmam promeruisse ferunt./1

  They say, in this too, Socrates the wise,

  And great in vertues combats, bare the prize.

  Cato, that strict censurer and severe corrector of others, hath
  beene reproved for much drinking.


----- 1 COR.  GAL.  El. i.

  Narratur et prisci Catonis

  Saepe mero coluisse virtus./1

  'Tis said, by use of wine repeated

  Old Catoes vertue oft was heated.


Cyrus, that so far-renowned king, amongst his other commendations,
meaning to preferre himselfe before his brother Artaxerxes, and get
the start of him, aleageth that he could drinke better and tipple more
than he.  And amongst the best policed and formalest nations, the
custome of drinking and pledging of healths was much in use.  I have
beard Silvius, that excellelent phisitian of Paris, affirme that to
preserve the vigor of our stomake from, empairing, it is not amisse
once a month to rowze up the same by this excesse of drinking, and
lest it should grow dull and stupid thereby to stirre it up.  And it
is written that the Persians, after they had well tippled, were wont
to consult of their chiefest affaires. My taste, my rellish, and my
complexion are sharper enemies unto this vice than my discourse, for
besides that I captivatee more easily my conceits under the auctoritie
of ancient opinions, indeed I finde it to be a fond, a stupid, and a
base kinde of vice, but lesse malicious and hurtfull than others; all
which shocke and with a sharper edge wound publike societie. And if we
cannot give ourselves any pleasure except (as they say) it cost us
something; I finde this vice to be lesse chargeable unto our
conscience than others; besides it is not hard to be prepared,
difficult to be found; a consideration not to be despised.  A man well
advanced in years and dignitie, amongst three principall commodities
he told me to have remaining in life, counted this: and where shall a
man more rightly finde it than amongst the naturall?  But he tooke it
ill, delicatenesse, and the choice of wines is therein to be avoided.
If you prepare your voluptuousnesse to drinke it with pleasure and
daintily neat, you tie your selfe unto an inconvenience to drinke it
other than is alwayes to be had.  A man must have

----- 1 HOR. 1. iii.  Od. xxi. ii.

a milder, a loose and freer taste.  To be a true drinker a man should
not have so tender and squeamish a palat.  The Germans doe in a manner
drinke equally of all sorts of wine with like pleasure.  Their end is
rather to gulpe it downe freely than to tast it kindly.  And To say
truth they have it better cheape.  Their voluptuousnesse is more
plenteous and fuller.  Secondarily, to drinke after the French manner,
as two droughts and moderately, is over much to restraine the favours
of that God.  There is more time and constancie required thereunto.
Our forefathers were wont to spend whole nights in that exercise, yea
often times they joyned whole long dayes unto them. And a man must
proportion his ordinarie more large and firme.  I have in my dayes
seene a principall Lord, a man of great employment and enterprises and
famous for good success, who without straining himselfe and eating but
an ordinary meales-meate, was wont to drinke little lesse than five
pottles of wine, yet at his rising seemed to be nothing distempered,
but rather, as we have found to our no small cost in managing our
affaires, over- wise and considerate.  The pleasure of that whereof we
would make account in the course of our life ought to be employed
longer space.  It were necessary, as shop-boyes or labouring people,
that we should refuse no occasion to drinke and continually to have
this desire in our minde. It seemeth that wee daily shorten the use of
this, and that in our houses (as I have seene in mine infancie)
breakfasts, nunchions, and beavers should be more frequent and often
used than now adayes they are.  And should wee thereby in any sort
proceed towards amendment?  No verily.  But it may be that we have
much more given our selves over unto paillardise and all manner of
luxurie than our fathers were.  They are two occupations that
enter-hinder one another in their vigor.  On the one side it hath
empaired and weakned our stomacke, and on the other sobrietie serveth
to make us more jolly-quaint, lusty, and wanton for the exercise of
love matters.  It is a wonder to thinke on the strange tales I have
heard my father report of the chastitie of his time.  He might well
speake of it as he that was both by art and nature proper for the use
and solace of ladies.  He spake little and well, few words, but to the
purpose, and was ever wont to entermixe some ornament taken from
vulgar bookes, and above all Spanish amongst his common speeches.  And
of all Spanish authors, none was more familiar unto him than Marcus
Aurelius./1 His demeanour and carriage was ever milde, meeke, gentle+,
and, very modest, and above all grave and stately.  There is nothing
he seemed to be more carefull of than of his honesty, and observe a
kinde of decencie of his person, and orderly decorum in his habits,
were it on foot or on horsebacke.  He was exceeding nice in performing
his word or promise+.  And so strictly concscientious and obsequious
in religion, that generally he seemed to incline toward superstition
than the contrary.  Though he were but a little man, his courage and
vigor was great.  He was of an upright and well proportioned stature,
of a pleasing, cheerfull- Iooking countenance, of a swarthy hue,
nimbly addicted, and exquisitely nimble unto all noble and
gentleman-like exercises. I have seene some hollow staves of his
filled with lead which hee wont to use and exercise his armes withall,
the better to enable himselfe to pitch the barre, to throw the sledge,
to cast the pole, and to @play at fence; and shoes with leaden soles,
which he wore to ensure himselfe to leape, to vault, and to run.  I
may without blushing say, that in memorie of himselfe, he hath left
certaine petie miracles amongst us.  I have seene him when he was past
threescore years of age mocke at all our sports, and out-countenance
our youthfull pastimes with a heavy furr'd gowne about him to leap
into his saddle.  To make the pommada round about a table upon his
thumb, and seldome to ascend any staires without skipping three or
four steps at once.  And concerning my discourse, hee was wont to say
that in a whole province there was scarce any woman of qualitie that
----- 1 GUEVARA.

had an ill name.  Hee would often report strange familiarities, namely
of his owne, with very honest women, without any suspicion at all.
And protested very religiously that when he was married he was yet a
pure virgine; yet had he long time followed the warres beyond the
mountaines, and therein served long, whereof he hath left a
Journall-booke of his owne collecting, wherein he hath particularly
noted whatsoever happened day by day worthy the observation so long as
he served, both for the publike and his particular use.  And he was
well strucken in years when he tooke a wife.  For returning out of
Italie in the yeare of our Lord one thousand five hundred eight and
twenty, and being full three and thirty years old by the way hee chose
himselfe a wife.  But come we to our drinking againe.  The
incommodities of age wbich need some helpe and refreshing, might with
some reason beget in me a desire or longing of this faculty, for it is
in a man the last pleasure which the course of our years stealeth upon
us.  Good fellowes say that naturall heat is first taken in our feet:
that properly belongeth to infancie.  From thence it ascendeth unto
the middle region, where it is setled and contitlueth a long time, and
in mine opinion there produceth the only true and moving pleasures of
this corporall life.  Other delight and sensualities in respect of
that doe but sleepe.  In the end, like unto a vapour which by little
and little exhaleth and mounteth aloft, it comes unto the throat and
there makes her last bode.  Yet could I never conceive how any man may
either encrease or prolong the pleasure of drinking beyond thirst, and
in his imagination frame an artificial appetite, and against nature.
My stomacke could not well reach so farre: it is very much troubled to
come to an end of that which it takes for his need.  My constitution
is to make no accompt of drinking but to succeed meat, and therefore
doe I ever make my last draught the greatest.  And forasmmuch as in
age we have the roofe of our mouthes covered with rhume, or
distempered, distated and altered through some other evill
constitution, wine seemeth better unto us and of a quicker relish,
according as our pores be either more or lesse open and washed.  At
least I seldome relish the same very well, except it be the first
drought I take.  Anacharsis wondered to see the Grecians drinke in
greater glasses at the end of their meales than in the beginning.  It
was (as I imagine) for the very same reason that the Germans doe it,
who never begin to carouse but when they have well fed.  Plato
forbiddeth children to drinke any wine before they be eighteene yeares
of age, and to be drunke before they come to forty.  But to such as
have once attained the age of fortie he is content to pardon them, if
they chance to delight themselves with it, and alloweth them somwhat
to blend the influence of Dionysius in their banquets, that good God,
who bestoweth cheerfulnesse upon men, and youth unto aged men, who
layeth and aswageteh the passions of the minde, even as yron is made
flexible by the fire: and in his profitable lawes holds
drinking-meetings or quaffing companies as necessary and commendable
(alwaies provided there be a chiefe leader amongst them to containe
and order them) drunkennesse being a good and certaine tryall of every
mans nature; and therewithall proper to give aged men the courage to
make merry in dancing and musicke; things alowable and profitable, and
such as they dare not undertake being sober and settled: That wine is
capable to supply the mind with temperance and the body with health.
Notwithstanding, these restrictions, partly borrowed of the
Carthaginians, please him well.  Let those forbeare it that are going
about any expedition of warre.  Let every magistrate and all judges
abstain from it at what time they are to execute their charge, and to
consult of publike affaires.  Let none bestow the day in drinking, as
the time that is due unto more serious negotiations, nor the nights
wherein a man intendeth to get children. It is reported that Stilpo
the Philosopher, finding himselfe surcharged with age, did purposely
hasten his end by drinking of with pure wine.  The like cause (though
not wittingly) did also suffocate the vital forces, crazed through old
age, of the Philosopher Arcesilaus.  But it is an old and pleasant
question whether a wise mans mind were like to yeeld unto the force of
wine.

  Si munitae adhibet vim sapientia./1

  If unresisted force it bends,

  Gainst wisdome which it selfe defends.

Unto what vanity doth the good opinion we have of ourselves provoke
us?  The most temperate and perfectest minde of the world findes it
too great a taske to keepe herselfe upright, lest she fall by her owne
weaknesse.  Of a thousand there is not one perfectly righteous and
settled but one instant of her life, and question might be made
whether according to her natural condition she might at any time be
so.  But to joyne constancie unto it is her last perfection: I meane
if nothing should shocke ber; which a thousand accidents may doe.
Lucretius, that famous Poet, may philosophie and bandie at his
pleasure: Loe where be lieth senslesse of an amorous potion.  Thinkes
any man that an apoplexie cannot as soone astonish Socrates as a poore
labouring man?  Some of them have by the force of a sicknesse forgot
their own names, and a slight hurt hath overthrown the judgement of
others.  Let him be as wise as he can, in the end he is but a man;
what is more fraile, more miserable, or more vaine?  Wisdome forceth
not our naturall conditions.

  Sudores itaque, et pallorem existere toto

  Corpore, et infringi linguam, vocemque aboriri

  Caligare, oculos, sonari aures, succidere artus,

  Denique concidere ex animi terrore videmus./2

  We see therefore, paleness and sweats oregrow

  Our bodies, tongues doe falter, voyce doth breake,

  Eyes dazle, eares buzze, joints doe shrinke below,

  Lastly we swoune by hart-fright, terrours weake.

He must seele his eyes against the blow that threateneth him;
being. neere the brimme of a precipice, he

----- 1 HOR.  Od. xxviii. 4. 2 LUCRET. 1. iii. 155.

must cry out like a child: Nature having purposed to reserve these
  light markes other aucthoritie unto herselfe, inexpuguable unto our
  reason, and to the Stoicke vertue: to teach him his mortalitie and
  our insipiditie. He waxeth pale for feare, be blusheth for shame, he
  groaneth feeling the cholike, if not with a desperate and
  lowd-roaring voice, yet with a low, smothered, and hoarse-sounding
  noise.  Humani a se nihil alienum putat,/1

  He thinkes, that nothing strange be can

  To him that longs to any man.

Giddie-headed Poets, that faine what they list, dare not so much as
discharge their Heroes from tears.

  Sic fatur lachrymans, classigue immitit habemas./2

  So said he weeping, and so saide,

  Himselfe hand to the sterage laide.

Let it suffice him to bridle his affections, and moderate his
inclinations; for it is not in him to beare them away.  Plutarke
himselfe, who is so perfect and excellent a judge of human actions,
seeing Brutus and Torquatus to kill their own children, remaineth
doubtfull whether vertue could reach so far and whether such men were
not rather moved by some other passion.  All actions beyond the
ordinary limits are subject to some sinister interpretation.
Forasmuch as our taste doth no more come unto that which is above it,
than to that which is under it.  Let us omit that other sect which
maketh open profession of fierceness.  But when in the very same sect
which is esteemed the most demisse, we heare the bragges of
Metrodorus:

  Occupavi te, Fortuna, atqe cepi; omnesque aditus tuos interclusi, ut
  ad me amirare non posses:/3

  'Fortune+, I have prevented, caught, and overtaken thee:

  I have mured and ramd up all thy passages, whereby thou mightest
  attaine unto mee:

When Anaxarchus, by the appointment of Nicocreon, the tyrant of
Cipres,

----- 1 TER.  Heaut. act i. sc. 1, 25. 2 VIRG.  Aen. 1. vi 1. 3 METR.
Cic. Tusc.  Qu. 1. v.

being laid along in a trough of stone, and smoten with yron sledges,
ceaseth not to crie out, 'Streeke, smite and breake; it is not
Anaxarchus, it is but his vaile you martyr so:' When we heare our
martyrs in the middst of a flame crie aloud unto the Tyrant, 'This
side is roasted enough, chop it, eat it, it is full roasted, now begin
on the other:' When in Josephus wee heere a child all to rent with
biting snippers, and pierced with the breath of Antiochus, to defie
him to death, crie with a lowde-assured and undismaid voyce, 'Tyrant,
thou losest time, loe I am still at mine ease; where is that smarting
paine, where are those torments wherewith whilom thou didst so
threaten me?  My constancie doth more trouble thee than I have feeling
of thy crueltie: Oh faint hearted varlet, doest thou yeeld when I
gather strength?  Make mee to faint or shrinke, cause me to moane or
lament, force me to yeeld and sue for grace if thou canst; encourage
thy satallities, harden thy executioners; loe how they droope and have
no more power; arme them, strengthen them, flesh them.  Verely we must
needs confesse there is some alteration, and some furie (how holy
soever) in those mindes, When we come unto these Stoick evasions: I
had rather be furious than voluptuous: the saying of Antisthenes,
Gkasjh sasgsh, 'Rather would I be mad than merry;' when Sextius
telleth us, he had rather be surprised with pain than sensuality; when
Epicurus undertakes to have the goute to wantonize and faune upon him,
and refuseth ease and health, with a hearty cheerefullnesse defie all
evils, and scornefully despising lesse sharpe griefs disdaining to
grapple with them, he blithely desireth and calleth for sharper, more
forcible and worthy of him.

  Spumantemque dari, pecora inter inertia, votis

  Optat aprum, aut fulvum descendere monte leonem:/2

  He wisht, mongst hartlesse beasts some foming Bore,

  Or mountaine-Lyon would come downe and rore;


----- 1 ANTIST.  Diogen.  Laert. 1. vi. c. i. 2 VIRG.
Aen. 1. iv. 158.

Who would not judge them to be prankes of a courage removed from his
  wonted seate?  Our minde cannot out of her place attaine so higb.
  She must quit it and raise herselfe aloft, and taking the bridle in
  her teeth, carry and transport her man so farre, that afterward he
  wonder at himselfe, and rest amazed at his actions.  As in exploit
  of warre, the heat and earnestnesse of the fight doth often provoke
  the noble minded souldiers to adventure on so dangerous passages
  that afterward being better advised, they are the first to wonder at
  it.  As also Poets are often surprised and rapt with admiration at
  their owne labours, and forget the trace by which they pass so happy
  a career.  It is that which some terme a fury or madnesse in them.
  And as Plato saith that a setled and reposed man doth in vaine
  knocke at Poesies gate; Aristotle likewise saith that no excellent
  minde is freely exempted from some or other entermixture of folly.
  And be hath reason to call any starting or extraordinarie conceit
  (how commendable soever) and which exceedeth our judgement and
  discourse, folly.  Forsomuch as wisdome is an orderly and regular
  managing of the minde, and which; she addresseth with measure, and
  conducteth with proportion; and taketh her owne word for it.  Plato
  disputeth thus: that the facultie of prophesying and divination is
  far above us, and that when wee treat it, we must be besides
  ourselves: our wisdome must be darkened and over shadowed by sleepe,
  by sicknesse, or by drowzinesse; or by some celestial fury, ravished
  from her owne seat.  CHAPTER 2.III+ A CUSTOME OF THE ILE OF CEA


IF, as some say, to philosophate be to doubt; with much more reason to
rave and fantastiquize, as I doe, must necessarily be to doubt: For,
to enquire and debate belongeth to a scholler, and to resolve
appertaines to a cathedrall master.  But know, my cathedrall, it is
the authoritie of Gods divine will, that without any contradiction
doth sway us, and hath her ranke beyond these humane and vaine
contestations.  Philip being with an armed band entered the countrie
of Peloponnesus, some one told Damidas the Lacedemonians were like to
endure much if they sought not to reobtaine his lost favour. 'Oh
varlet as thou art (answered be).  And what can they suffer who have
no feare at all of death?  Agis being demanded, how a man might do to
live free, answered; 'Despising and contemning to die.  These and a
thousand like propositions, which concurre in this purpose, do
evidently inferre some thing beyond patient expecting of death it
selfe to be suffered in this life: witnesse the Lacedemonian child,
taken by Antigonus, and sold for a slave, who urged by his master to
perform some abject service; 'Thou shalt see (said he) whom thou hast
bought, for it were a shame for me to serve, having libertie so neere
at hand;' and therewithall threw himselfe headlong downe from the top
of the house.  Antipater, sharply threatning the Lacedemonians, to
make them yeeld to a certains request of his; they answered, shouldest
thou menace us worse than death, we will rather die. And to Philip,
who having written unto them that he would hinder all their
enterprises; 'What? (say they) wilt thou, also hinder us from dying?
That is the reason why some say that the wise man liveth as long as he
ought, and not so long as he can.  And that the favourablest gift
nature hath bequeathed us, and which removeth all meanes from us to
complaine of our condition, is, that she hath left us the key of the
fields.  She hath appointed but one entrance unto life, but many a
thousand ways out of it: Well may we want ground to live upon, but
never ground to die, in; as Boiocalus answered the Romanes.  Why dost
thou complaine against this world?  It doth not containe thee: If thou
livest in paine and sorrow, thy base courage is the cause of it.  To
die there wanteth but will.

  Ubigue nors est. optime hoc cavit Deus,

  Eripere vitam memo non homini potest:

  At nemo mortem: mille ad hanc aditus patent./1

  Each where death is: God did this well purvey,

  No man but can from man life take away,

  But none barres death, to it lies many a way.

And it is not a receipt to one malady alone; Death is a remedy against
all evils: It is a most assured haven, never to be feared, and often
to be sought: All comes to one period, whether man make an end of
himselfe, or whether he endure it; whether he run before his day, or
whether he expect it: whence soever it come, it is ever his owne,
where ever the threed be broken, it is all there, it's the end of the
web. The voluntariest death is the fairest.  Life dependeth on the
will of others, death on ours.  In nothing should we so much
accommodate our selves to our humors as in that.  Reputation doth
nothing concerne such an enterprise, it is folly to have any respect
unto it.  To live is to serve, if the libertie to dye he wanting.  The
common course of curing any infirmitie is ever directed at the charge
of life: we have incisions made into us, we are cauterized, we have
limbs cut and mangled, we are let bloud, we are dieted.  Goe we but
one step further, we need no more physicke, we are-perfectly
whole. Why

----- 1 SEN.  Theb. act mod. 1. 1. sc.

is not our jugular or throat-veine as much at our command as the
medians ?  To extreme sicknesses, extreme remedies.  Servius the
Grammarian being troubled with the gowt, found no better meanes to be
rid of it than to apply poison to mortifie his legs.  He cared not
whether they were Podagrees or no, so they were insensible.  God
giveth us sufficient privilege, when be placeth us in such an estate,
as life is worse than death unto us.  It is weaknesse to yeeld to
evils, but folly to foster them.  The Stoikes say it is a convenient
naturall life, for a wise man, to forgoe life, although he abound in
all happinesse, if he doe it opportunely: And for a foole to prolong
his life, albeit he be most miserable, provided he be in most part of
things, which they say to be according unto nature; As I offend not
the lawes made against theeves when I cut mine owne purse, and carry
away mine owne goods; nor of destroyers when I burne mine owne wood;
so am I nothing tied unto lawes made against murtherers, if I deprive
my selfe of mine owne life.  Hegesias was wont to say, that even as
the condition of life, so should the qualitie of death depend on our
election.  And Diogenes meeting with the Philosopher Speusippus, long
time afflicted with the dropsie, and therefore carried in a litter,
who cried out unto him, All haile Diogenes: And to thee no health at
all (replied Diogenes), that endurest to live in so wretched an
estate.  True it is, that a while after, Speusippus, as overtired with
so languishing a condition of life, compassed his owne death. But this
goeth not without some contradiction: For many are of opinion, that
without the expresse commandment of him that hath placed us in this
world, we may by no meanes forsake the garrison of it, and that it is
in the hands of God only, who therein bath placed us, not for our
selves alone, but for his glory, and others services when ever it
shall please him to discharge us hence, and not for us to take leave:
That we are not borne for our selves, but for our Countrie: The Lawes
for their owne interest require an accompt at our hands for our
selves, and have a just action of murther against us.  Else as
forsakers of our owne charge, we are punished in the other world.

  Proxima deinde tenent maesti loca, qui sibi lethum

  Insontes peperere manu, lucemque perosi

  Projecere animas./1

  Next place they lamentable hold in hell,

  Whose hand their death caused causelesse, (but not well) And hating
  life did thence their soules expell.

There is more constancie in using the chaine that holds us than in
breaking the same; and more triall of stedfastnesse in Regulus than in
Cato.  It is indiscretion and impatience that hastneth our way.  No
accidents can force a man to turne his backe from lively vertue: She
seeketh out evils and sorrowes as her nourishment.  The threats of
fell tyrants, tortures and torments, executioners and torturers, doe
animate and quicken her.

  Duris ut ilex tonsa bipennibus

  Nigrae feraci frondis in Algido

  Per damna, per caedes, ab ipso

  Ducit opes animumque fero./2

  As holme-tree doth with hard axe lopt

  On hils with many holme-trees topt,

  From losse, from cuttings it doth feele,

  Courage and store rise ev'n from steele,

  And as the other saith,

  Non est putas virtus, pater,

  Timere vitam, sed malis ingentibus

  Obstare, nec se vertereac vetro dare./3

  Sir, 'tis not vertue, as you understand,

  To feare life, but grosse mischiefe to withstand,

  Not to retire, turne backe, at any hand.

Rebus in adversis facile est contemnere mortem.  Fortius ille facit,
qui miser esse potest./4 'Tis easie in crosse chance death to despise:
He that can wretched be, doth stronger rise.' It is the part of
cowardlinesse, and not of vertue, to

----- 1 VIRG.  Aen. 1. vi. 434. 2 HOR. 1. iv.  Od. iv. 57. 3 SEN.
Theb. act i. sc. 1. 4 MART. 1. xi.  Epig. lvii. 15.

seeke to squat it selfe in some hollow lurking hole, or to hide her
selfe under some massie tombe, thereby to shun the strokes of
fortune. She never forsakes her course, nor leaves her way, what
stormie weather soever crosse her.

  Si fractus illabatur orbis.

  Impavidam ferient ruinae./1

  If the world broken should upon her fall,

  The ruines may her strike, but not appall,

The avoyding of other inconveniences doth most commonly drive us into
this, yea, sometimes the shunning of death makes us to run into it.

  Hic, rogo, nonfuror est, ne moriare, mori?|2

  Madnesse is't not, say I,

  To dye, lest you should dye?

As those who for feare, of a break-necke downe-fall, doe headlong cast
themselves into it.

  ----- multos in summa pericula misit

  Venturi timor ipse mali fortissimus ille est,


  Qui promptus metuenda pati, si cominus instent

  Et diferre potest./3

  The very feare of ils to come, hath sent

  Many to mighty dangers: strongest they,

  Who fearfull things t' endure are ready bent

  If they confront them, yet can them delay.

  Usque adeo mortisformidine, vitae

  Percepit humanos odium, lucisqe videndae,

  Ut sibi consciscant maerenti pectore lethum,

  Obliti fonte currarum hunc esse timorem.4

  So far by feare of death, the hate of life,

  And seeing light, doth men as men possesse,

  They grieving kill themselves to end the strife,

  Forgetting, feare is spring of their distresse.

Plato in his Lawes alots him that hath deprived his

------------ 1 HOR. 1. iii.  Od. iii. 7. 2 MART. 1. ii.
Epig. lxxx. 2. 3 LUCAN. 1. vii. 104. 4 LUCRET. 1. iii. 79.

neerest and deerest friend of life (that is to say, himselfe) and
abridged him of the destinies course, not constrained by any publike
judgement, nor by any lewd and inevitilble accident of fortune, nor by
any intolerable shame or infamy, but through basenesse of minde, and
weakenesse of a faint-fearful courage, to have a most ignominious and
ever-reproachfull buriall.  And the opinion which disdaineth our life
is ridiculous: For in fine it is our being.  It is our all in all.
Things that have a nobler and richer being nay accuse ours: But it is
against nature, we should despise, and carelesly set our selves at
naught: It is a particular infirmitie, and, which is not seene in any
other creature, to hate and disdaine himselfe.  It is of like vanitie,
that we desire to be other than we are.  The fruit of such a desire
doth not concerne us, forasmuch as it contradicteth and hindereth it
selfe in it selfe.  He that desireth to be made of a man an Angell
doth nothing for himselfe: He should be nothing the better by it: And
being no more, who shall rejoyce or conceive any gladnesse of this
change or amendment for him?

  Debet enim misere cui forte aegreque futuram est,

  Ipse quoque esse in eo tum tempore, cum male possit

  Accidere./1

  For he, who shall perchance prove miserable,

  And speed but ill, should then himselfe be able

  To be himselfe, when ils may chance unstable.

The security, indolencie, impassibility, and privation of this lifes
evils, which we purchase at the price of death, bring us no
cornmoditie at all.  In vaine doth he avoid warre that cannot enjoy
peace; and bootlesse doth he shun paine that hath no meanes to feele
rest.  Amongst those of the first opinion, great questioning hath
beene to know what occasions are sufficiently just and lawfull to make
a man undertake the killing of himselfe, they call that c6xo-yo;,
Eta-yco rhp,/2 a reasonable orderly out-let.  For, although they say a
man must

----- 1 LUCR. 1. iii. 905. 2 ALEX.  Aphrod.

often dye for slight causes, since these that keepe us alive are not
very strong; yet is some measure required in them.  There are certaine
fantasticall and brainesicke humors, which have not only provoked
particular men, but whole Nations to defeat themselves.  I have
heretofore aleaged some examples of them: And moreover we reade of
certaine Milesian virgins, who upon a furious conspiracie hanged
themselves one after another, untill such time as the Magistrate
provided for it, appointing that such as should be found so hanged,
should with their owne halters be dragged naked thorow the streets of
the citie.  When Threicion perswadeth Cleomenes to kill himselfe, by
reason of the bad and desperate estate his affaires stood in, and
having escaped a more honourable death in the battell which he had
lately lost, moveth him to accept of this other, which is second to
him in honour, and give the Conqueror no leisure to make him endure,
either another death, or else a shamefull life, Cleomenes, with a
Lacedemonian and Stoike courage, refuseth this counsell as base and
effeminate: It is a receipt (saith he) which can never faile me, and
whereof a man should make no use, so long as there remaineth but one
inch of hope: That to live, is sometimes constancie and valour; 'That
he will have his very death serve his Countrie, and by it shew an act
of honour and of vertue.  Threicion then beleeved, and killed
himselfe.  Cleomenes did afterwards as much, but not before he had
tried and assayed the utmost power of fortune.  All inconveniencies
are not so much worth that a man should dye to eschue them.  Moreover,
there being so many sudden changes and violent alterations in humane
things, it is hard to judge in what state or point we are justly at
the end of our hope: [Edgar]

  Sperat et in saeva victus gladiator arena,

  Sit licet infesto pollice turba minax./1

  The Fencer hopes, though down in lists he lye,

  And people with turn'd hand threats he must dye.


All things, saith an ancient proverb, may a man

----- 1 SEN.  Epist. xiii.

hope for so long as he liveth: yea, but answereth Seneca, wherefore
shall I rather have that in minde; that fortune can do all things for
him that is living, than this; that fortune hath no power at all over
him who knoweth how to dye?  Josephus is seene engaged in so
apparent-approaching danger, with a whole nation against him, that
according to humane reason there was no way for him to escape;
notwithstanding being (as he saith) counselled by a friend of his, at
that instant, to kill himselfe, it fell out well for him to opinionate
himselfe yet in hope: for fortune, beyond all mans discourse, did so
turne and change that accident, that without any inconvenience at all,
he saw himselfe delivered: whereas on the contrarie Brutus and
Cassius, by reason of the down-fall and rashnesse, wherewith before
due time and occasion they killed themselves; did utterly lose the
reliques of the Roman libertie , whereof they were protectors.  The
Lord of Anguien in the battell of Serisolles, as one desperate of the
combats successe, which on his side went to wracke, attempted twice to
run himselfe thorow the throat with his rapier and thought by
precipitation to bereave himselfe of the enjoying of so notable a
victorie.  I have seene a hundred Hares save themselves even in the
Grey-hounds jawes: liquis carnifici suo superstes fuit./1 'Some man
hath outlived his Hang-man.

  Multa dies variusque labor mutabilis evi

  Rettulit in melius, multos alterna revisens

  Lusit, et in solido rursus fortuna locavit./2

  Time, and of turning age the divers strains,

  Hath much to better brought, fortunes turn'd traine

  Hath many mock'd, and set them fast againe.

Plinie saith there are but three sorts of sicknesses, which to avoid,
a man may have some colour of reason to kill himselfe. The sharpest of
all is the stone in the bladder, when the urine is there stopped.
Seneca, those onely, which for long time disturbe and distract the
offices of the minde.  To avoid a worse death,

----- 1 SEN.  Epist. xiii. 2 VIRG.  Aen. 1. xi. 426.

some are of opinion, a man should take it at his owne pleasure.
Democritus, chiefe of the AEtolians, being led captive to Rome, found
meanes to escape by night but being pursued by his keepers, rather,
than he would be taken againe, ran himselfe thorow with his sword.
Antinous and Theodotus, their Citie of Epirus being by the Romans
reduced unto great extremitie, concluded, and perswaded all the people
to kill themselves.  But the counsell, rather to yield, having
prevailed, they went to seeke their owne death, and rushed amidst the
thickest of their enemies, with an intention rather to strike than to
ward themselves.  The Iland of Gosa, being some yeares since surprised
and over-run by the Turkes, a certaine Sicilian therein dwelling,
having two faire daughters ready to be marrried, killed them both with
his owne bands, together with their mother, that came in to help them
that done, running out into the streets, with a crossebow in one band
and a caliver in the other, at two shoots slew the two first Turks
that came next to his gates, then resolutely drawing his sword, ran
furiously among them, by whom he was suddenly hewen in peeces: Thus,
did be save himselfe from slavish bondage, having first delivered his
owne from it.  The Jewish women, after they had caused their children
to be circumcised, to avoid the crueltie of Antiochus, did headlong
precipitate themselves and them unto death.  I have heard it credibly
reported that a gentleman of qood quality being prisoner in one of our
gaols, his parents advertized that he should assuredly be condemned to
avoid the infamie of so reproachfull a deathg, appointed a priest to
tell him that the best remedy was to recommend himselfe to such a with
such a saint, with such ,@and such a vow, and to continue eight dayes
without taking any sustenance, what faintnesse or weaknesse soever he
should feele in himselfe.  He believed them, and so without thinking
on it, was delivered out of life and danger.  Scribonia perswading
Libo her nephew, to kill himselfe, rather than to await the stroke of
justice, told him that for a man to preserve his owne life, to put it
into the hands of such as three or foure dayes after should come and
seek it, was even to dispatch another man's business, and that it was
no other than for one to serve his enemies to preserve his bloud,
therewith to make food.  We read in the Bible that Nicanor the
persecutor of Gods law, having seint his satellites to apprehend the
good old man Rasias for the honour of his vertue, surnamed the father
of the Jewes; when that good man saw no other means left him, his gate
being burned, and his enemies ready to lay hold on him, chose rather
than to fall into the hands of such villaines and be so basely abused
against the honour of his place, to dye nobly, and so smote himselfe
with his owne sword; but by reason of his haste, having not thoroughly
slaine himselfe, he ran to throw himselfe downe from an high wall,
amongst the throng of people, which making him roome, he fell right
upon his head.  All which notwithstanding, perceiving life to remaine
in him, he tooke heart againe; and getting up on his feet, all goared
with bloud and loaden with strokes, making way through the prease,
came to a craggy and downe-steepy rock, where, unable to go any
further, by one of his wounds with both his hands pulled out his guts,
and tearing and breaking them cast them amongst such as pursued him,
calling and attesting the vengeance of God to light upon them.  Of all
violences committed against conscience, the most in mine opinion to be
avoided is that which is offered against the chastitie of
women. Forasmuch as there is naturally some corporall pleasure commixt
with it, and therefore the dissent cannot fully enough be joyned
thereunto; and it seemeth that force is in some sort intermixed with
some will.  The ecclesiastical storie hath in especiall reverence
sundry such examples of devout persons who called for death to warrant
them from the outrages which some tyrants prepared against their
religion and consciences.  Pelagia and Sophronia, both canonised, the
first, together with her mother and sisters, to escape the outrageous
rapes of some souldiers, threw her selfe into a river; the other, to
shun the force of Maxentius, the Emperor, slew her selfe.  It shall
peradventure redound to our honour in future ages, that a wise author
of these dayes, and namely a Parisian,, doth labour to perswade the
ladies of our times rather to hazard upon any resolution than to
embrace so horrible a counsell of such desperation. I am sorie that to
put amongst his discourses he knew not the good saying I learnt of a
woman at Tholouse, who had passed through the hands of some souldiers:
'God be praised,' said she, 'that once in my life I have had my belly
full without sinne.  Verify these cruelties are not worthy of the
French curtesie.  And God be thanked, since this good advertisement,
our ayre is infinitely purged of them.  Let it suffice that in doing
it they say no, and take it, following the rule of Marot.  The
historie is very full of such, who a thousand ways have changed
lingering, toylsome life with death.  Lucius Aruntius killed himselfe,
as he said to avoid what was past and eschue what was to come.
Granius Sylvanus and Statius Proximus, after they had beene pardoned
by Nero, killed themselves, either because they scorned to live by the
favour of so wicked a man, or because they would not another time be
in danger of a second pardon, seeing his so easie-yielding unto
suspicions and accusations against honest men.  Spargapises, sonne
unto Queene Tomiris, prisoner by the law of warre unto Cyrus, employed
the first favour that Cyrus did him by setting him free, to kill
himselfe, as be who never pretended to reap other fruit by his
liberty, than to revenge the infamie of his taking upon himselfe.
Boges, a Governor for King Xerxes, in the country of Ionia, being
besieged by the Athenians army, under the conduct of Cymon, refused
the composition to returne safely, together with his goods and
treasure, into Asia, as one impatient to survive the loss of what his
master had given him in charge; and after he had stoutly, and even to
the last extremity, defended the towne, having no manner of victuals
left him; first he all the gold and treasure, with whatsoever he
imagined the enemy might reap any commoditie by, into the river
Strimon. Then having caused a great pile of wood to be set on fire,
and made all women, children, concubines and servants to be stripped
and throwne into the flames, afterward ran in himselfe, where all were
burned.  Ninachetuen, a lord in the East Indies, having had an inkling
of the King of Portugales viceroys deliberation to dispossess him,
without any apparent cause of the charge he had in Malaca, for to give
it unto the King of Campar, of himselfe took this resolution: First,
he caused an high scaffold to be set up, somewhat longer than broad,
underpropped with pillars, all gorgeously hanged with rich tapestrie,
strewed with flowers and adorned with precious perfumes.  Then, having
put on a sumptuous long robe of cloth of gold, richly beset with store
of precious stones of inestimable worth, he came out of the palace
into the street, and by certaine steps ascended the scaffold, in one
of the corners whereof was a pile of aromaticall wood set afire. All
the people of the citie were flocked together to see what the meaning
of such unaccustomed preparation might tend unto.  Ninachetuen, with
an undanted, bold, yet seeming discontented countenance, declared the
manifold obligations which the Portugal nation was endebted unto him
for, expostulated how faithfully and truly he had dealt in his charge;
that having so often witnessed, armed at all assayes for others, that
his honour was much dearer unto him than life, he was not to forsake
the care of it for himselfe; that fortune refusing him all means to
oppose himselfe against the injurie intended against him, his courage
at the least willed him to remove the feeling thereof, and not become
a laughing stocke unto the people, and a triumph to men of lesse worth
than himselfe, which words, as he was speaking, he cast himselfe into
the fire.  Sextilia, the wife of Scaurus, and Praxea, wife unto Labeo,
to encourage their husbands to avoid the dangers which pressed them,
wherein they had no share (but in regard of the interest of their
conjugal affection), voluntarily engaged their life, in this extreme
necessitie, to serve them as an example to imitate and company to
regard.  What they performed for their husbands, Cocceius Nerva acted
for his countrie, and though lesse profitable, yet equall in true
love.  That famous interpreter of the lawes, abounding in riches, in
reputation, in credit, and flourishing in health about the Emperour,
had no other cause to rid himselfe of life but the compassion of the
miserable estate, wherein he saw the Romane commonwealth. Nothing can
be added unto the daintinesse of the wifes death of Fulvius who was so
inward with Augustus.  Augustus perceiving he had blabbed a certaine
secret of importance, which he on trust had revealed unto him, one
morning comming to visit him, he seemed to frowne upon him for it;
whereupon as guilty, he returneth home as one full of despaire, and in
piteous sort told his wife that sithence he was falne into such a
misechiefe, be was resolved to kill himselfe; shee, as one no whit
dismaied, replied unto him: 'Thou shalt doe but right, since having so
often exprienced the incontinence of my tongue, thou hast not learnt
to beware of it, yet give me leave to kill my selfe first,' and
without more adoe ran her selfe thorow with a sword.  Vibius Virius
despairing of his cities safetie, besieged by the Romans, and
mistrusting their mercie, in their Senates last consultation, after
many remonstrances employed to that end, concluded that the best and
fairest way was to escape fortune by their owne bands.  The very
enemies should have them in more honour, and Hanniball might perceive
what faithfull friends he had forsaken.  Enviting those that should
allow of his advice to come and take a good supper, which was prepared
in his house, where, after great cheere, they should drinke together
whatsoever should be presented unto him; a drinke that shall deliver
our bodies from torments, free our mindes from injuries, and release
our eyes and eares from seeing and hearing so horrible mischiefes,
which the conquered must endure at the hands of most cruell and
offended conquerors.  'I have,' quoth he, 'taken order that nen fit
for that purpose shall be ready, when we shall be expired, to cast us
into a great burning pile of wood.  Diverse approved of his high
resolution, but few did imitate the same.  Seven and twentie Senators
followed him, who after they had attempted to stifle so irkesome and
suppress so terror-moving a thought, with quaffing and swelling of
wine, they ended their repast by this deadly messe: and enter-bracing
one another, after they had in common deplored and bewailed their
countries misfortunes, some went home to their owne house, othersome
stayed there, to be entombed with Vibius in his owne fire, whose death
was so long and lingering, forsomuch as the vapor of the wine having
possessed their veines, and slowed the effect and operation of the
poyson, that some lived an hour after they had seen their enemies
enter Capua,, which they caried the next day after, and incurred the
miseries and saw the calamities which at so high a rate they had
sought to eschue.  Taurea Iubellius, another citizen there, the
Consull Fulvius returning from that shameful slaughter which he had
committed of 225 Senators, called him churlishly by his name, and
having arrested him; 'Co;nmand, 'quoth he unto him, 'that I also be
massacred after so many others, that so thou maiest brag to have
murthered a much more valiant man than ever thou wast. Fulvius, as one
enraged, disdaining him; forasmuch as be had newly received letters
from Rome contrarie to the inhumanitie of his execution, which
inhibited him to proceed any further; Iubellius, continuing his
speech, said: 'Sithence my Countrie is taken, my friends butchered,
and having with mine owne hands slaine my wife and children, as the
onely meane to free them from the desolation of this ruine, I may not
dye the death of my fellow citizens, let us borrow the vengeance of
this hatefull life from vertue:' And drawing a blade he had hidden
under his garments, therewith ran himselfe thorow, and falling on his
face, died at the Consuls feet. Alexander besieged a Citie in India,
the inhabitants whereof, perceiving themselves brought to a very
narrow pinch, resolved obstinately to deprive him of the pleasure he
might get of his victorie, and together with their Citie, in despite
of his humanitie set both the Towne and themselves on a light fire,
and so were all consumed.  A new kinde of warring, where the enemies
did all they could, and sought to save them, they to loose themselves,
and to be assured of their death, did all a man can possibly effect to
warrant his life.  Astapa, a Citie in Spaine, being very weake of wals
and other defences, to withstand the Romanes that besieged it; the
inhabitants drew all their riches and wealth into the market-place,
whereof having made a heap, and on the top of it placed their wives
and children, and encompassed and covered the same with drie brush
wood that it might burne the easier, and having appointed fifty lusty
young men of theirs for the performance of their resolution, made a
sally, where following their determined vow, seeing they could not
vanquish, suffered themselves to be slaine every mothers childe.  The
fifty, after they had massacred every living soule remaining in the
Citie, and set fire to the heap joyfully leaped there-into, ending
their generous liberty in a state rather insensible than dolorous and
reproachfull; showing their enemies that, if fortune had beene so
pleased, they should as well have had the courage to bereave them of
the victory as they, had to yeeld it them both vaine and hideous, yea,
and mortall to those who allured by the glittering of the gold that
moulten ran from out the flame, thicke and threefold approching
greedily unto it, were therein smothered and burned, the formost being
unable to give back, by reason of the throng that followed them.  The
Abideans, pressed by Philip, resolved upon the very same, but being
prevented, the King whose heart abhorred to see the fond-rash
precipitation of such an execution (having first seized upon and saved
the treasure and moveables, which they had diversly condemned to the
lames and utter spoyle) retiring all the Souldiers, granted them the
full space of three dayes to make themselves away, that so they might
doe it with more order and leisure; which three dayes they replenished
with blood and murther beyond all hostile cruelty: And which is
strange, there was no one person saved that had power upon himselfe.
There are infinite examples of such-like popular conclusions, which
seeme more violent by how much more the effect of them is more
universall. They are lesse than when severall.  What discourse would
not doe in each one, it doth in all the vehemence of societie
ravishing particular judgements. Such as were condemned to dye in the
time of Tiberius, and delaid their execution any while, lost their
goods, and could not be buried; but such as prvented the same, in
killing themselves,, were solemnly enterred, and might at their
pleasure bequeath such goods as they had to whom they list. But a man
doth also sometimes desire death, in hope of a greater good. 'I
desire,' saith Saint Paul, 'to be out of this world, that I may be
with Jesus Christ: and who shal release me out of these bonds?
Cleombrotus Ambraciota, having read Platoes Pheadon, was so possessed
with a desire and longing for an after-life, that without other
occasion or more adoe, he went and headlong cast himselfe into the
sea.  Whereby it appeareth how improperly we call this voluntarie
dissolution despaire; unto which the violence of hope doth often
transport us, and as often a peacefull ana setled inclination of
judgement.  Iaques du Castell, Bishop of Soissons, in the voyage which
Saint Lewes undertooke beyond the seas, seeing the King and all his
army ready to returne into France, and leave the affaires of Religion
imperfect, resolved with himselfe rather to goe to heaven; And having
bidden his friends farewell, in the open view of all men, rushed alone
into the enemies troops, of whom he was forthwith hewen in pieces.  In
a certaine kingdome of these late- discovered Indies, upon a day of a
solemne procession, in which the idols they adore are publikely
carried up and down upon a chariot of exceeding greatnesse: besides
that, there are many seene to cut and slice great mammocks of their
quicke flesh to offer the said idols; there are numbers of others
seene who, prostrating themselves alongst the ground, endure very
patiently to be mouldred and crushed to death under the chariots
wheels, thinking thereby to purchase after their death a veneration of
holinesse, of which they are not defrauded.  The death of this Bishop,
armed as we have said, argueth more generositie and lesse sense: the
heat of the combat ammusing one part of it.  Some common-wealths there
are that have gone about to sway the justice and direct the
opportunitie of voluntarie deaths.  In our Citie of Marseille they
were wont in former ages ever to keepe some poison in store, prepared
and compounded with hemlocke, at the Cities charge, for such as would
upon any occasion shorten their daies, having first approved the
reasons of their enterprise unto the six hundred Elders of the Towne,
which was their Senate: For otherwise it was unlawfull for any body,
except by the Magistrates permission, and for very lawfully-urgent
occasions, to lay violent hands upon himselfe.  The very same law was
likewise used in other places.  Sextus Pompeius, going into Asia,
passed thorow the Iland of Cea, belonging to Negropont; it fortuned
whilest he abode there (as one as one reporteth that was in his
companie) that a woman of great authority, having first yielded an
accompt unto her Citizens and shewed good reasons why she was resolved
to end her life, earnestly entreated Pompey to be an assistant at her
at her death, that so it might be esteemed more honourable, which he
assented unto; and having long time in vaine sought, by vertue of his
eloquence (wherein be was exceeding ready) and force of perswasion, to
alter her intent and remove her from her purpose, in the end yeelded
to her request.  She had lived foure score and ten yeares in a most
happy state of minde and body, but when lying on her bed, better
adorned than before she was accustomed to have it, and leaning on her
elbow, thus she bespoke: 'The Gods, O Sextus Pompeius, and rather
those I forgoe than those I goe unto, reward and appay thee, for that
thou hast vouchsafed to be both a counsellor of my life and a witnesse
of my death.  As for my part, having hitherto ever tasted the
favourable visage of fortune, for feare the desire of living overlong
should make me taste of her frownes, with an happy and successfull end
I will now depart, and set free the remainder of my soule, leaving
behind me two daughters of, mine, with a legion of grand-children and
nephewes.  That done, having preached unto and exhorted all her people
and kinsfolks to an unitie and peace, and divided her goods amongst
them, and recommended her household Gods unto her eldest daughter,
with an assuredly-staide hand she tooke the cup wherein the poyson
was, and having made her vowes unto Mercurie, and prayers to conduct
her unto some happy place in the other world, roundly swallowed that
mortall potion; which done, she intertained the progresse of her
behaviour, and as the parts of her body were one after another
possessed with the cold operation of that venom: untill such time as
shee felt it worke at the heart and in her entrals, shee called her
daughter to doe her the last office and close her eyes.  Plinie
reporteth of a certaine Hiperborean nation, wherein, by reason of the
mild temperature of the aire, the inhabitants thereof commonly never
dye, but when they please to make themselves away, and that being
weary and tired with living they are accustomed at the end of a
long-long age, having first made merry and good cheare with their
friends, from the top of an high-steepy rocke appointed for that
purpose, to cast themselves headlong into the sea.  Grieving-smart,
and a worse death seeme to me the most ecxusable incitations.

CHAPTER 2.IV+ TO-MORROW IS A NEW DAY

I DO with some reason, as me seemeth, give pricke and praise unto
Iaques Amiot above all our French writers, not only for his natural
purity, and pure elegancie of the tongue, wherin he excelleth all
others, nor for his indefatigable constancie of so long and toilesome
a labour, nor for the unsearchable depth of his knowledge, having so
successfully-happy been able to explaine an Author so close and
thorny, and unfold a writer so mysterious and entangled (for let any
man tell me what he list, I have no skill of the Greeke, but I see
thorowout al his translation a sense so closely-joynted, and so
pithily- continued, that either he hath assuredly understood and inned
the very imagination, and the true conceit of the Author, or having
through a long and continnall conversion, lively planted in his minde
a generall Idea of that of Plutarke, he hath at least lent him nothing
that doth belye him, or misseeme him) but above all, I kon him thanks
that he hath had the hap to chuse, and knowledge to cull-out so worthy
a worke, and a booke so fit to the purpose, therewith to make so
unvaluable a present unto his Countrie.  We that are in the number of
the ignorant had beene utterly confounded, had not his booke raised us
from out the dust of ignorance: God-a-mercy his endevours we dare not
both speak and write: Even Ladies are therewith able to confront
Masters of arts: It is our breviarie.  If so good a man chance to
live, I bequeath Xenophon unto him, to doe as much.  It is an easier
peece of worke, and so much the more agreeing to his age.  Moreover I
wot not how me seemeth, although he roundly and clearly disintangle
himself from hard passages,, that notwithstanding his stile is more
close and neerer it selfe when it is not laboured and wrested, and
that it glideth smoothly at his pleasure.  I was even now reading of
that place where Plutarke speaketh of himself, that Rusticus being
present at a declamation of his in Rome, received a packet from the
Emperour, which he temporized to open untill he had made an end:
wherein (saith he) all the assistants did singularly commend the
gravitie of the man.  Verily, being on the instance of curiositie and
on the greedy and insatiate passion of newes, which with such
indiscreet impatience and impatient indiscretion, induceth us to
neglect all things for to entertaine a new-come guest, and forget all
respect and countenance whersoover we be, suddenly to break up such
letters as are brought us; he had reason to commend the gravitie of
Rusticus: to which he might also have added the commendation of his
civilitie and curtesie, for that be would not interrupt the course of
his declamation: But I make a question whether he might be commended
for his wisdome; for receiving unexpected letters, and especially from
an Emperour, it might very well have fortuned that this deferring to
read them might have caused some notable inconvenience. Recklesness is
the vice contrarie unto curiosity+, towards which I am naturally
inclined, aud wherein I have seen many men, so extremely plunged, that
three or foure days after the receiving of letters which have been
sent them, they have been found in their pockets yet unopened.  I
never opened any, not only of such as had beene committed to my
keeping, but of such as by any fortune came to my hands.  And I make a
conscience standing neare some great person if mine eyes chance
unawares to steale some knowledge of any letters of importance that he
readeth.  Never was man lesse inquisitive, or pryed lesse into other
mens affaires than I.  In our fathers time the Lord of Boutieres was
like to have lost Turin, forsomuch as being one night at supper in
very good company he deferred the reading of an advertisement which
was delivered him of the treasons that were practised and complotted
against that Citie where he commanded.  And Plutarke himselfe has
taught me that Iulius Caesar had escaped death, if going to the
Senate-house that day wherein he was murdered by the conspirators he
had read a memorial which was presented unto him.  Who likewise
reporteth the storie of Archias, the Tyrant of Thebes, how the night
fore- going the execution of the enterprize that Pelopidas had
complotted to kill him, thereby to set his Countrie at libertie:
another Archias of Athens writ him a letter wherein he particularly
related unto him all that was conspired and complotted against him;
which letter being delivered him whilst he sate at supper, he deferred
the opening of it, pronouncing this by-word: 'To morrow is a new day,'
which afterward was turned to a Proverb in Greece. A wise man may, in
mine opinion, for the interest of others, as not unmannerly to breake
companie like unto Rusticus, or not to discontinue some other affaire
of importance, remit and defer to understand such newes as are brought
him; but for his own private interest or particular pleasure, namely,
if he be a man having publike charge, if he regard his dinner so much
that he will not break it off, or his sleepe that he will not
interrupt it: to doe it, is inexcusable.  And in former ages was the
Consulate-place in Rome, which they named the most honourable at the
table, because it was more free and more accessible for such as might
casually come in, to entertaine him that should be there placed.
Witnesse, that though they were sitting at the board, they neither
omitted nor gave over the managing of other affaires and following of
other accidents.  But when all is said, it is very hard, chiefely in
humane actions, to prescribe so exact rules by discourse of reason,
that fortune+ doe not sway, and keepe her right in them.

CHAPTER 2.V+ OF CONSCIENCE

My brother the Lord of Brousse and myself, during the time of our
civill warres, travelling one day together, we fortuned to meet upon
the way with a Gentleman in outward semblance, of good demeanour: He
was of our contrary faction, but forasmuch as he counterfeited
himselfe otherwise, I knew it not.  And the worst of these tumultuous
intestine broyles is, that the cards are so shuffled (your enemie
being neither by language nor by fashion, nor by any other apparent
marke distinguished from you; nay, which is more, brought up under the
same lawes and customes, and breathing the same ayre) that it is a
very hard matter to avoid confusion and shun disorder.  Which
consideration made me not a little fearefull to meet with our troopes,
especially where I was not knowns, lest I should be urged to tell my
name, and haply doe worse.  As other times before it had befalne me;
for, by such a chance, or rather mistaking, I fortuned once to lose
all my men and horses and hardly escaped myself: and amongst other my
losses and servants that were slaine, the thing that most grieved me
was the untimely and miserable death of a young Italian Gentlemen whom
I kept as my Page, and very carefully brought up, with whom dyed as
forward, as budding and as hopefull a youth as ever I saw.  But this
man seemed fearfully dismaid, and at every encounter of horseman and
passage by, or thorow any Towne that held for the King, I observed him
to be so strangely distracted that in the end I perceived and guessed
they were but guilty alarums that his conscience gave him. It eemed
unto this seely man that all might apparently, both through his
blushing selfe-accusing countenance, and by the crosses he wore upon
his upper garments, read the secret intentions of his faint heart.  Of
such marvailous-working power is the sting of conscience: which often
induceth us to bewray, to accuse, and to combat our selves; and for
want of other evidences she produceth our selves against our selves.

  Occultum quaetiens animo tortore flagellum./1

  Their minde, the tormentor of sinne,

  Shaking an unscene whip within.


The storie of Bessus the Paeonian is so common, that even children
have it in their mouths, who being found, fault withal, that in mirth
he had beaten downe a nest of young Sparrowes and then killed them,
answered, he had great reason to doe it; forsomuch as those young
birds ceased not falsly to accuse him to have murthered his father,
which parricide was never suspected to have beene committed by him,
and until that day had layen secret; but the revengefull furies of the
conscience made the same partie to reveale it, that by all right was
to do penance for so hatefull and unnaturall a murther.  Hesiodus
correcteth the saying of Plato, that punishment doth commonly succeed
the guilt, and follow sinne at hand: for, he affirmeth, that it rather
is borne at the instant and together with sinne it selfe, and they are
as twinnes borne at one birth together. 'Whosoever expects punishment
suffereth the same, and whosoever deserveth it, he doth expect it.
Impietie doth invent, and iniquitie doth frame torments against
itselfe,' - Malum constilium consultori pessimum, - /2 Bad counsell is
worst for the counsellor that gives the counsell, even as the waspe
stingeth and offendeth others, but herselfe much more; for, in hurting
others, she loseth her force and sting for ever.

----- 1 JUVEN.  Sat. xiii. 195. 2 ERAS.  Chil. i. cent. ii. ad. 14.

  ----- vitasque in vulnere ponunt./1

  They, while they others sting,

  Death to themselves do bring.


The Cantharides have some part in them, which by a contrarietie of
nature serveth as an antidot or counter-poison against their poison:
so likewise, as one taketh pleasure in vice, there is a certaine
contrarie displeasure engendred in the conscience, which by sundry
irksome and painfull imaginations, perplexeth and tormenteth us, both
waking and asleep.

  Quippe ubi se multi per somnia saepe loquentes, Aut morbo delirantes
  protraxe ferantur,

  Et celata diu in medium peccata delisse./2

  Many in dreames oft speaking, or unhealed,

  In sicknesse raving have themselves revealed,

  And brought to light their sinnes long time concealed.

Apollodorus dreamed he saw himselfe first flead by the Scythians, and
then boyled in a pot, and that his owne heart murmured, saying: 'I
only have caused this mischiefe to light upon thee.  Epicurus was wont
to say, that no lurking hole can shroud the wicked, for they can never
assure themselves to be sufficiently hidden, sithence conscience is
ever ready to disclose them to themselves.

  ----- prima est haec ultio, quod se

  Iudice nemo nocens absolvitur./3

 
  This is the first revenge, no guilty mind

  Is quitted, though it selfe be judge assign'd.


Which as it doth fill us with feare and doubt, so doth it store us
with assurance and trust.  And I may boldly say that I have waded
thorow many dangerous hazards with a more untired pace, only in
consideration of the secret knowledge I had of mine owne will, and
innocencie of my desseignes.

----- 1 VIRG.  Georg. 1. iv. 238. 2 LUCR. 1. v. 1168. 3 JUVEN.
Sat. xiii. 2.

  Conscia mens ut cuique sua est, ita concipit intra

  Pectora pro facto spemque metumque suo./1

  As each mans minde is guiltie, so doth he

  Inlie breed hope and feare, as his deeds be.

Of examples there are thousands: It shall suffice us to alleage three
only, and all of one man.  Scipio being one day accused before the
Romane people of an urgent and capitall accusation, in stead of
excusing himselfe, or flattering the Judges; turning to them, he said:
'It will well beseeme you to undertake to judge of his head, by whose
meanes you have authoritie to judge of all the world.  The same man,
another time, being vehemently urged by a Tribune of the people, who
charged him with sundry imputations, in lieu of pleading or excusing
his cause, gave him this sudden and short answer: 'Let us goe (quoth
he), my good Citizens; let us forthwith goe (I say) to give hartie
thanks unto the Gods for the victorie, which even upon such a day as
this is they gave me against the Carthaginians.  And therewith
advancing himselfe to march before the people, all the assembly, and
even his accuser himselfe did undelayedly follow him towards the
Temple.  After that, Petilius having beene animated and stirred up by
Cato to solicite and demand a strict accompt of him, of the money he
had managed, and which was committed to his trust whilest he was in
the Province of Antioch, Scipio, being come into the Senate- house of
purpose to answer for himselfe, pulling out the booke of his accompts
from under his gowne, told them all that that booke contained truly
both the receipt and laying out thereof; and being required to deliver
the same unto a Clarke to register it, he refused to doe it, saying he
would not doe himselfe that wrong or indignitie; and thereupon with
his owne hands, in presence of all the Senate, tore the booke in
peeces.  I cannot apprehend or beleeve that a guiltie-cauterized
conscience could possibly dissemble or counterfet such an undismayed
assurance: His heart was naturally too

----- 1 OVID.  Fast. 1. i. 487.

great, and enured to overhigh fortune (saith Titus Livius) to know how
to be a criminall offender, and stoopingly to yeeld himself to the
baseness to defend his innocencie.  Tortrure and racking are dangerous
inventions, and seeme rather to be trials of patience than Essayes of
truth.  And both he that can, and he that cannot endure them, conceale
the truth.  For wherefore shall paine or smart rather compell me to
confesse that which is so indeed than force me to tell that which is
not?  And contrariwise, if he who hath not done that whereof he is
accused, is sufficiently patient to endure those torments, why shall
not he @ able to tolerate them who hath done it, and is guilty indeed;
so deare and worthy a reward as life being proposed unto him?  I am of
opinion that the ground of this invention proceedeth from the
consideration of the power and facultie of the conscience.  For, to
the guilty, it seemeth to give a kinde of furtherance to the torture,
to make him confesse his fault, and weakneth and dismayeth him: and on
the other part, it encourageth and strengthneth the innocent against
torture. To say truth, it is a meane full of uncertainty and danger.
What would not a man say, nay, what not doe, to avoid so grievous
paines and shun such torments?

  Etiam innocentes cogit mentiri dolor./1

  Torment to lye sometimes will drive,

  Ev'n the most innocent alive.

Whence it followeth that he whom the Judge hath tortured, because he
shall not dye an innocent, he shall bring him to his death, both
innocent and tortured.  Many thousands have thereby charged their
heads with false confessions.  Amongst which I may well place
Phylotas, considering the circumstances of the endictment that
Alexander framed against him, and the progresse of his torture.  But
so it is, that (as men say) it is the least evill humane weaknesse
could invent;

----- 1 Ex Mimis Publicanis.

though, in my conceit, very inhumanely, and there withall most
  unprofitably. Many Nations lesse barbarous in that than the Grecian
  or the Romane, who terme them so, judge it a horrible and cruell
  thing to racke and torment a man for a fault whereof you are yet in
  doubt.  Is your ignorance long of him?  What can he doe withall?
  Are not you unjust who because you will not put him to death without
  some cause, you doe worse than kill him?  And that it is so,
  consider but how often he rather chuseth to dye guiltlesse than
  passe by this informat1on, much more painfull than the punishment or
  torment; and who many times, by reason of the sharpnesse of it,
  preventeth, furthereth, yea, and executeth the punishment.  I wot
  not whence I heard this story, but it exactly hath reference unto
  the conscience of our Justice. A countrie woman accused a souldier
  before his Generall, being a most severe Justicer, that he, with
  violence, had snatched from out her poore childrens hands, the small
  remainder of some pap or water-gruell, which she had onely left to
  sustaine them, forsomuch as the Army had ravaged and wasted all. The
  poore woman had neither witnesse nor proofe of it: it was but her
  yea and his no; which the Generall perceiving, after be had summoned
  her to be well advised what she spake, and that shee should not
  accuse him wrongfully; for, if shee spake an untruth, shee should
  then be culpable of his-accusation: But shee constantly persisting
  to charge him, he forthwith, to discover the truth, and to be
  thoroughly resolved, caused the accused Souldiers belly to be
  ripped, who was found faulty, and the poore woman to have said true;
  whereupon shee was discharged.  A condemnation instructive to
  others.  CHAPTER 2.VI+ OF EXERCISE OR PRACTICE


It is a hard matter (although our conceit doe willingly apply, it
selfe unto it) that Discourse and Instruction should sufficiently be
powerful to direct us to action, and addresse us to performance, if,
over and besides that, we doe not by experience exercise and frame our
minde to the traine whereunto we will range it: otherwise, when we
shall be on the point of the effects, it will doubtlesse finde it
selfe much engaged aud empeached. And that is the reason why amongst
Philosophers, those that have willed to attaine to some greater
excellence, have not beene content, at home and at rest, to expect the
rigors of fortune+, for feare she should surprise them unexperienced
and finde them novices, if she should chance to enterfight with them
but have rather gone to meet and front her before, and
witting-earnestly cast themselves to the triall of the hardest
difficulties.  Some have thereby voluntarily forsaken great riches,
onely to practise a voluntarie povertie; others have willingly found
out labour, and an austeritie of a toylesome life thereby to harden
and enure themselves to evill and travell; othersome have frankly
deprived themselves of the dearest and best parts of their body, as of
their eyes and members of generation, lest their overpleasing and
too-too wanton service might in any sort mollifie and distract the
constant resolution of their minde.  But to dye, which is the greatest
worke we have to doe, exercise can nothing availe us thereunto.  A man
may, by custome aud experience, fortifie himselfe against griefe,
sorrow, shame, want, and such like accidents; but concerning death, we
can but once feele and trie the same.  We are all novices, and new to
learne when we come unto it.  There have, in former times, beene found
men so good husbands and thrifty of time, that even in death they have
assayed to taste and savor it; and bent their minde to observe and see
what manner of thing that passage of death was; but none did ever yet
come backe againe to tell us tidings of it. [Hamlet]

  ----- nemo expergitus extat

  Frigida quem semel est vitai pausa sequuta./1


  No man doth ever-after wake,

  Whom once his lifes cold rest doth take.

Canius Iulius, a noble Romane, a man of singular vertue and
constancie, having beene condemned to death by that lewdly-
misehievous monster of men, Caligula: besides many marvelous evident
assurances he gave of his matchlesse resolution, when he was even in
the nicke to endure the last stroke of the executioner; a Philosopher,
being his friend, interrupted him with this question, saying: 'Canius,
in what state is your soule now? what doth she? what th oughts
possesse you now? 'I thought,' answered he, to keepe me ready and
prepared with all my force, to see whether in this instant of death,
so short and so neere at hand, I might perceive some dislodging or
distraction of the soule, and whether it will shew some feeling of her
sudden departure; that (if I apprehend or learne any thing of her) I
may afterward, if I can, returne and give advertisement thereof unto
my friends.  Loe-here a Philosopher, not only untill death, but even
in death it selfe: what assurance was it, and what fiercenes of
courage, to will that his owne death should serve him as a lesson, and
have leasure to thinke else where in a matter of such consequence;

  ----- jus hoc animi morientis habebat.2/

  This power of minde had he,

  When it from him did flee.


----- 1 LUCRET. 1. iii. 973. 2 LUCAN. 1. viii. 636.

Me seemeth, neverthelesse, that in some sort there is a meane to
familiarize our selves with it, and to assay it.  We may have some
experience of it, if not whole and perfect, at least such as may not
altogether be unprofitable, and whicb may yeeld us better fortified
and more assured.  If we cannot attaine unto it, we may at least
approch it, and discerne the same: And if we cannot enter her fort,
yet shal we see and frequent the approches unto it.  It is not without
reason we are taught to take notice of our sleepe for the resemblance
it hath with death. [Donne, Hamlet] How easily we passe from wakmg to
sleeping; with how little interest we lose the knowledge of light and
of our selves.  The facultie of sleepe might haply seeme unprofitable
and against nature, sithence it depriveth up of all actions and
barreth us of all sense, were it not that nature doth thereby instruct
us that she hath equally made us as well to live as to die; and by
life presenteth the eternal state unto us which she after the same
reserveth for us, so to accustome us thereunto, and remove the feare
of it from us.  But such as by some violent accident are falne into a
faintnes of heart, and have lost all senses, they, in mine opinion,
have well-nigh beene where they might behold her true and naturall
visage: For, touching the instant or moment of the passage, it is not
to be feared it should bring any traveil or displeasure with it,
forasmuch as we can have nor sense nor feeling without pleasure.  Our
sufferances have need of time, which is so short, and plunged in
death, that necessarily it must be insensible.  It is the approches
that lead unto it we should feare; and those may fall within the
compasse of mans experience.  Many things seeme greater by imagination
than by effect.  I have passed over a good part of my age in sound and
perfect health.  I say not only sound but blithe and wantonly
lustfull.  That state full of lust, of prime and mirth, made me deeme
the consideration of sicknesses so yrkesome and horrible, that when I
came to the experience of them I have found their fits but weake, and
their assaults but faint, in respect of my apprehended feare. Lo here
what I daily prove.  Let me be under a roofe, in a good chamber,
warme-clad, and well at ease, in some tempestuous and stormy night.  I
am exceedingly perplexed and much grieved for such as are abroad and
have no shelter: But let me be in the storme my selfe, I doe not so
much as desire to be else-where: Only to be continually pent up in a
chamber seemed intolerable to me.  I have now enured my selfe to live
a whole weeke, yea a moneth in my chamber, full of care, trouble,
alteration, and weaknesse; and have found that in the time of my best
health I moaned such as were sicke much more than I can well moane my
selfe when I am ill at ease: and that the power of my apprehension did
well- nigh halfe endeare the essence and truth of the thing it selfe.
I am in good hope the like will happen to me of death: and that it is
not worth the labour I take for so many preparations as I prepare
against her; and so many helpes as I call to sustaine, and assemble to
endure the shocke and violence of it.  But hab or nab we can never
take too much advantage of it.  During our second or third troubles (I
doe not well remember which) I fortuned one day, for recreation sake,
to goe forth and take the ayre, about a league from my house, who am
seated even in the bowels of all troubles of our civill warres of
France, supposing to be most safe, so neere mine owne home and
retreite, that I had no need of better attendance or equipage.  I was
mounted upon a very easie-going nag, but not very sure.  At my
returning home againe, a sudden occasion being offered me to make use
of this nag in a peece of service whereto he was neither trained nor
accustomed, one of my men (a strong sturdy fellow), mounted upon a
young strongheaded horse, and that a desperate hard mouth, fresh,
lusty and in breath, to shew his courage, and to outgoe his fellowes,
fortuned with might and maine to set spurrs unto him, and givinf him
the bridle, to come right into the path where I was, and as a colossus
with his weight riding over me and my nag, that were both very little,
he overthrew us both, and made us fall with our heeles upward: so that
the nag lay along astonied in one place, and I in a trance groveling
on the ground ten or twelfe paces wide of him: my face all torne and
brused, my sword which I had in my hand a good way from me, my girdle
broken, with no more motion or sense in me than a stocke.  It is the
only swooning that ever I felt yet.  Those that were with, me, after
they had assayed all possible meanes to bring me to my selfe againe,
supposing me dead, tooke me in their armes, and with much adoe were
carrying me home to my house, which was about halfe a French league
thence: upon the way, and after I had for two houres space by all
beene supposed dead and past all recoverie, I began to stir and
breathe: for so great aboundance of bloud was falne into my stomake,
that to discharge it nature was foreed to rowse up her spirits.  I was
immediately set upon my feet, and bending forward, I presently cast up
in quantitie as much clottie pure bloud as a bucket will hold and by
the way was constrained to doe the like divers times before I could
get home, whereby, I began to recover a little life, but it was by
little and little, and so long adoing, that my chiefe senses were much
more enclining to death than to life.

  Perche dubbiosa ancor del suo ritorno

  iVon s'assicura attonita la mente./1

  For yet the minde doubtfull of it's returne

  Is not assured, but astonished.

The remembrance whereof (which yet I beare deepely imprinted in my
minde) representing me her visage and Idea so lively and so naturally,
doth in some sort reconcile me unto her.  And when I began to see, it
was with so dim, so weake and so troubled a sight, that I could not
discerne anything of the light,

  ----- come quel ch'or apre, or chiude

  Gli occhi, mezzo tra l' sonno e l'esser desto./2


  As he that sometimes opens, sometimes shuts

  His eyes, betweene sleepe and awake.

----- 1 TASSO, Gierus. xii. 74. 2 Ibid. viii. 26.

Touching the functions of the soule, they started up and came in the
same progresse as those of the bodie.  I perceived my selfe all
bloudy; for my doublet was all sullied with the bloud I had cast. The
first conceit I apprehended was that I had received some shot in my
head; and in truth, at the same instant, there were divers that shot
round about us.  Me thought my selfe had no other hold of me but of my
lips-ends. I closed mine eyes to help (as me seemed) to send it forth,
and tooke a kinde of pleasure to linger and languishingly to let my
selfe goe from my selfe.  It was an imagination swimming superficially
in my minde, as weake and as tender as all the rest: but in truth, not
only exempted from displeasure but rather commixt with that pleasant
sweetesse which they feel that suffer themselves to fall into a
soft-slumbring and sense-entrancing sleepe.  I beleeve it is the same
state they find themselves in, whom in the agony of death we see to
droop and faint thorow weaknesse: and am of opinion we plaine and
moane them without cause, esteeming that either they are agitated with
grievous pangs, or that their soule is pressed with painfull
cogitations.  It was ever my conceit against the opinion of many, yea
and against that of Estienne de la Bo‰tie,that those whom we see so
overwhelmed and faintly-drooping at the approches of their end, or
utterly cast downe with the lingring tediousnesse of their deseases,
or by accident of some apoplexie or falling-evill,

  ----- (vi morbi saepe coactus

  Ante oculos aliquis nostros ut fulminis ictu,

  Concidit, et spumas agit, ingemit, et fremit artus,

  Desipit exentant nervos torquetur, anhelat,

  Inconstanter et in jactando membra fatigat),/1

  (Some man by force of sicknesse drivn doth fall,

  As if by thunder stroke, before our eyes;

  He fomes, he grones, he trembles over all,

  He raves, he stretches, he's vext, panting lyes,

  He tyr's his limmes by tossing,

  Now this now that way crossing,)


----- 1 LUCRET. 1. iii. 490.

or hurt in the head, whom we heare throb and rattle, and send forth
grones and gaspes, although we gather some tokens from them, whereby
it seemeth they have yet some knowledge left and certaine motions we
see them make with their body: I say, I have ever thought they had
their soule and body buried and asleepe.

  Vivat et est vitae nescius ipse sum./1

  He lives yet knowes not he,

  That he alive should be.


And I could not beleeve that at so great an astonishment of members
and deffailance of senses the soule could maintaine any force within,
to know herselfe; and therefore had no manner of discourse tormenting
them, which might make them judge and feele the misery of their
condition, and that consequently they were not greatly to be moaned.
As for my selfe, I imagine no state so intolerable nor condition so
horrible, as to have a feelingly-afflicted soule, void of meanes to
disburthen and declare herselfe: As I would say of those we send to
execution, having first caused their tongue to be cut out, were it not
that in this manner of death the most dumbe seemes unto me the
fittest, namely, if it be accompanied with a resolute and grave
countenance.  And as those miserable prisoners which light in the
hands of those hard-harted and villenous Souldiers of these times, of
whom they are tormented with all maner of cruell entreatie, by
compulsion to drawe them unto some excessive and unpossible ransoms,
keeping them al that while in so hard a condition and place, that they
have no way left them to utter their thoughts and expresse their
miserie.  The Poets have fained there were some Gods that favoured the
release of such as suffered so languishing deaths.

  -----hunc ego Diti

  Sacrum jussa fero, teque isto corpore solvo./2


  This to death sacred, I, as was my charge,

  Doe beare, and from this body thee enlarge.

----- 1 OVID.  Trist. 1. i.  El. iii. 12. 2 VIRG.  AEn. 1. iv. 703.

And the faltering speeches and uncertaine answers, that by continuall
  ringing in their eares and incessant urging them, are sometimes by
  force wrested from them, or by the motions which seeme to have some
  sympathy with that whereof they are examined, is notwithstanding no
  witnes that they live at least a perfect sound life.  We do also in
  yawning, before sleep fully seize upon us, apprehend as it were in a
  slumber, what is done about us, and with a troubled and uncertains
  hearing, follow the voyces, which seeme to sound but on the outward
  limits of our soule; and frame answers according to the last words
  we heard, which taste more of chance than of sense: which thing now
  I have proved by experience, I make no doubt but hitherto I have
  well judged of it.  For, first lying as in a trance, I laboured even
  with my nailes to open my doublet (for I was unarmed), and well I
  wot that in my imagination I felt nothing did hurt me.  For, there
  are several motions in us which proceed not of our free wil.
  Semianimesque micant digiti, ferrumque retractant./1

  The halfe-dead fingers stirre, and feele,

  (Though it they cannot stirre) for steele.
  
Those that fall, doe commonly by a naturall impulsion cast their armes
abroad before their falling, which sheweth that our members have
certaine offices, which they lend one to another, and possesse
certaine agitations, apart from our discourse:
  
  Falciferos memorant currus abscindere membra,

  Ut tremere in terra videatur ab artubus, id quod

  Decidit abscissum, cum mens tamen atque hominis vis

  Mobilitate mali non quit sentire dolorem./2

  They say, sith-bearing chariots limbes bereave,

  So as on earth, that which cut-off they leave,

  Doth seeme to quake; when yet mans force and minde

  Doth not the paine, through so quicke motion, finde.


---- - 1 VIRG.  AEn. 1. x. 396. 2 LUCRET. 1. iii.  My stomacke was
surcharged with clotted bloud, my hands of themselves were still
running to it, as often they are wont (yea against the knowledge of
our will) where we feele it to itch.  There are many creatures, yea
and some men, in whom after they are dead we may see their muskles to
close and stirre.  All men know by experience, there be some parts of
our bodies which often without any consent of ours doe stirre, stand,
and lye down againe.  Now these passions, which but exteriourly touch
us, cannot properly be termed ours; for, to make them ours, a man must
wholy be engaged unto them: And the paities that ourlfeet or hands
feele whilst we sleepe are not ours.  When I came neere my house,
where the tidings of my fall was already come, and those of my
household met me, with such outcries as are used in like times, I did
not only answer some words to what I was demanded, but some tell me I
had the memory to command my men to give my wife a horse, whom I
perceieved to be overtired, and labouring in the way, which is very
hilly, foule, and rugged.  It seemeth this consideration proceeded
from a vigilant soule: yet was I cleane distracated from it, they were
but vaine conceits, and as in a cloud, were only moved by the senses
of the eyes and eares: they came not from my selfe.  All which not
withstanding, I knew neither whence I came nor whither I went, nor
could I understand or consider what was spoken unto me.  They were but
light effects, that my senses produced of themselves, as it were of
custome.  Whatsoever the soule did assist it with was but a dreame,
being lightly touched, and only sprinkled by the soft impression of
the sense.  In the meane time my state was verily most pleasant and
easefull.  I felt no manner of care or affliction, neither for my
selfe nor others.  It was a slumbering, languishing and extreme
weaknesse, without any paine at all.  I saw mine own house and knew it
not; when I was laid in my bed, I felt great ease in my rest, For I
had beene vilely hurried and haled by those poore men, which had taken
the paines to carry me upon their armes a long and wearysome way, and
to say truth, they had all beene wearied twice or thrice over, and
were faine to shift several] times.  Many remedies were presently
offered me, but I tooke none, supposing verily I had beene deadly hurt
in the head. To say truth, it had beene a very happy death: For, the
weaknesse of my discourse hindered me from judging of it, and the
feeblenesse of my body from feeling the same.  Me thought I was
yeelding up the ghost so gently, and after so easie and indolent a
manner, that I feele no other action lesse burthensome than that was.
But when I began to come to life againe and recover my former strength
-

  Vt tandem sensus convaluere mei - /1

  At last when all the sprites I beare,

  Recalled aild recollected were -

which was within two or three houres after, I presently felt my selfe
full of aches and paines all my body over; for, each part thereof was
with the violence of the fall much brused and tainted; and for two or
three nights after I found my self so ill, that I verily supposed I
shold have had another fit of death: But that a more lively, and
sensible one: (and to speak plaine) I feele my bruses yet, and feare
me shall do while I live: I will not forget to tell you, that the last
thing I could rightly fall into againe was the remembrance of this
accident, and I made my men many times to repeat me over and over
againe, whither I was going, whence I came, and what houre that chance
befell me, before I could throughly conceive it.  Concerning the
manner of my falling, they in favour of him who had beene the cause of
it, concealed the truth from me, and told me other flim flam
tales. But a while after and the morrow next, when my memorie began to
come to itselfe againe, and represent the state unto me wherein I was
at the instant, when I perceived the horse riding over me (for being
at my heeles, I chanced to espy him and helde my selfe for dead: yet
was the conceit so sudden that feare had no leasure to

----- 1 OVID.  Trist. 1. i.  El.. iii. 14.

enter my thoughts) me seemed it was a flashing or lightning that smote
my soule with shaking, and that I came from another world.  This
discourse of so slight an accident is but vaine and frivolous were not
the instructions I have drawne from thence for my use: For truly, for
a man to acquaint himselfe with death+, I finde no better way than to
approach unto it.  Now, as Plinie saith, every man is a good
discipline unto himselfe, alwayes provided he be able to prie into
himselfe.  This is not my doctrine, it is but my study and not another
man's lesson, but mine owne: Yet ought no man to blame me if I impart
the same.  What serves my turne may haply serve another mans:
otherwise I marre nothing; what I make use of is mine owne.  And if I
play the foole, it is at mine owne cost, and without any other bodies
interest, For it is but a kind of folly that dies in me, and hath no
traine.  We have notice but of two or three former ancients that have
trodden this path; yet can we not say, whether altogether like unto
this of mine, for we know but their names.  No man since hath followed
their steps; it is a thorny and crabbed enterprise, and more than it
makes show of, to follow so strange and vagabond a path as that of our
spirit: to penetrate the shady, and enter the thicke-covered depths of
these infernall winding crankes; to chuse so many and settle so
severall aires of his agitatations: And tis a new extraordinary
ammusing that distracts us from the common occupation of the world,
yea, and from the most recommended: Many yeares are past since I have
no other aime whereto my thoughts bend, but my selfe, and that I
controule and study nothing but my selfe.  And if I study anything
else, it is immediately to place it upon, or to say better in
myselfe. And met hinks I err not, as commonly men doe in other
sciences, without all comparison less profitable.  I impart what I
have content not my selfe therein. 'There is no description so hard,
nor so profitable, as is the description of a man own life.  Yet must
a man handsomely trimme-up, yea and dispose and range himselfe to
appeare on the Theatre of this world.  Now I continually tricke up my
selfe; for I uncessantly describe my selfe.  Custome hath made a mans
speech of himselfe vicious, and obstinately forbids it in hatred of
boasting+, which ever seemeth closely to follow one's selfe witnesses.
Whereas a man should wipe the childs nose, that is now called to
unnose himselfe.

  In vicium ducit culpae fuga./1

  Some shunning of some sinne,

  Doe draw some further in.


I finde more evill than good by this remedy: But suppose it were true,
that for a man to entertaine the company with talking of himself were
necessarily presumption, I ought not, following my generall intent, to
refuse an action that publisheth this crazed quality, since I have it
in my seIfe: and I should not conceal this fault, which I have not
only in use but in profession.  Neverthelesse, to speak my opinion of
it, this custome to condemne wine is much to blame, because many are
there with made drunke.  Only good things may be abused.  And I
believe this rule hath only regard to popular defects: They are snares
wherewith neither Saints, nor Philosophers, nor Divines, whom we heare
so gloriously to speak of themselves, will in any sort be bridled.  No
more doe I, though I be no more the one than the other.  If they write
purposely or directly of it, yet when occasion doth conveniently lead
them unto it, faine they not headlong to cast themselves into the
lists?  Whereof doth Socrates treat more at large than of himselfe?
To what doth he more often direct his disciples discourses, than to
speake of themselves, not for their bookes lesson, but of the essence
and moving of their soule?  We religiously shrive our selves to God
and our Confessor, as our neighbours to all the people.  But will some
answer me, we report but accusation; wee then report all: For even our

----- 1 HOR.  Art.  Poet. 81.

virtue it self is faulty and repentable.  My art and profession is to
live.  Who forbids me to speake of it according to my sense,
experience, and custome; let him appoint the Architect to speake of
buildings, not according to himselfe, but his neighbours according to
anothers skill, and not his owne.  If it be a glory for a man to
publish his owne worth himselfe, why does not Cicero prefer the
eloquence of Hortensius, and Hortensius that of Cicero?  Some may
peradventure suppose that by deeds and effects, and not simply by
words, I witnesse of my selfe.  I principally set forth my
cogitations; a shapelesse subject, and which cannot fall within the
compasse of a workemanlike production; with much adoe can I set it
downe in this ayrie bodie of the voice.  Wiser men, and more learned
and devout, have lived avoiding all apparent effects.  Effects would
speak more of fortune than of me.  They witnesse their part and not
mine, unlesse it be conjecturally and uncertainly: parcels of a
particular shew.  I wholy set forth and expose my selfe: It is a
Sceletos; where at first sight appeare all the vaines, muskles,
gristles, sinnewes and tendons, each severall part in his due place.
The effect of the cough produceth, one part, that of at of palenesse
or panting of the heart another, and that doubtfully.  I write not my
gests, but my selfe and my essence.  I am of opinion that a man must
be very wise to esteeme himselfe, and equally consciencious to give
testimony of it: be it low, be it high indifferently.  If I did
absolutely seeme good and wise unto my selfe, I would boldly declare
it.  To speake lesse of himselfe than he possesseth, is folly, and not
modesty+.  To say himself for lesse than he is worth is basenesse and
pusilanimity, saith Aristotle.  No vertue aids it self with
false-hood, and truth is never a matter of errour.  And yet for a man
to say more of himself than he can well prove, is not ever presumption
though often sottishnesse.  For a man to over-weene and please himself
exceedingly with what he is, and fall into indiscreet love with
himselfe, is in my conceit the substance of this vice.  The best
remedy to cure him, is to do cleane contrary to that which those
appoint, who in forbidding men to speak of themselves, do consequentiy
also inhibit more to thinke of themselves. Pride consisteth in
conceit.  The tongue can have no great share in it. For one to ammuse
on himself is in their imagination to please himselfe: And for a man
to frequent and practise himselfe, is at an over-deare rate to please
himselfe.  But this excess doth only breed in them, that but
superficially feele and search themselves that are seene to follow
their affaires, which call idleness and fondnesse for a man to
entertaine, to applaud, and to endeare himselfe, and frame Chimeraes
or build Castles in the ayre, deeming themselves as a third person and
strangers to themselves.  If any be besotted with his owne knowledge
looking upon himselfe, let him cast his eyes towards former ages, his
pride shall be abated, his ambition shall be quailed; for there shall
he find many thousands of spirits that will cleane suppress and tread
him under.  If he fortune to enter any selfe-presumption of his own
worth, let him but call to remembrance the lives of Scipio+ and
Epaminondas+; so many armies, and so many Nations which leave him so
far behind them.{ancients+} No particular quality shall make him
proud, that therewith shall reckon so many imperfect and weak
qualities that in him and at last the nullity of the human condition.
Forsomuch as Socrates+ had truly only nibled on the precept of his God
to know himself, and had learned to contemne himself, he alone was
esteemed worthy of the name of Wise.  Whosoever shall so know himselfe
let him boldly make himself knowns by his own mouth.

CHAPTER 2.VII+ OF THE RECOMPENSES OR REWARDS OF HONOUR


THOSE which write the life of Augustas Caesar note this in his
military discipline, that he was exceeding liberal and lavish in his
gifts to such as were of any desert; but as sparing and strait-handed
in meere recompences of honour+.  Yet so it is that himselfe had beene
liberally gratified by his Unkle with militarie rewards, before ever
he went to warres.  It hath beene a witty invention, and received in
most parts of the worlds Common-wealths, to establish and ordaine
certaine vaine and worthles markes, therewith to honour and recompence
vertue: As are the wreathes of Lawrell, the Chaplets of Oake, and the
Garlands of Myrtle, the forme of a certaine peculiar garment; the
privilege to ride in Coach thorow the City; or by night to have a
Torch carried before one: Some particular place to sit in in common
assemblies; the prerogatives of certaine surnames and titles, and
proper additions in armes, and such like things; the, use whereof hath
beene diversly received according to the opinion of nations which
continueth to this day.  We have for our part, together with divers of
our neighbour-nations, the orders of knighthood, which only were
established to this purpose.  Verily it is a most laudable use and
profitable custome, to find means to reward the worth and acknowledge
the valour of rare and excellent men, to satisfie and content them
with such payments as in no sort charge the commonwealth, and put the
prince to no cost at all.  And that which was ever knowne by ancient
experience, and at other times we have plainly perceived amongst
ourselves, that men of qualitie were ever more jealous of such
recompences than of others wherein was both gaine and profit, which
was not without reason and great apparence.  If to the prize, which
ought simply to be of honour, there be other commodities and riches
joyned, this kinde of commixing, instead of encreasing the estimation
thereof, doth empaire, dissipate, and abridge it.  The order of the
Knights of Saint Michael in France, which of so long contuauance hath
beene in credit amongst as, had no greater commoditie than that it had
no manner of communication with any other advantage or profit, which
hath heretofore beene the cause that there was no charge or state of
what quality soever, whereto the nobilitie pretended with so much
desire, or aspired with more affection, as it did to obtaine that
order; nor calling that was followed with more respect or greatnesse.
Vertue+ embracing with more ambition, nud more willingly aspiring
after a recompense, that is meerely and simply her owne, and which is
rather glorious than profitable.  For, to say truth, other gifts have
no use so worthy, inasmuch as they are imployed to all manner of
occasions. With riches a man doth reward the service of a groome, the
diligence of a messenger, the hopping of a dancer, the tricks of a
vaulter, the breath of a lawyer+, and the basest offices a man may
receive; yea, with the same paultry pelfe mony, vice is payed and sin
requited, as flattery, murther, treason, Maquerelage, and what not?
It is then no marvel, if vertue doth lesse willingly desire this kinde
of common trash, mony, than that which is only proper and peculiar to
her selfe, and is altogether noble and generous. Augustus had
therefore reason to be much more niggardly amd sparing of this last
than of the former, forasmuch as honour+ is a privilege that draws his
preincipall essence from rareness; and so doth verture it selfe.

  Cui malus est nemo, quis bonus esse potest?/1

  To him who good can seeme,

  Who doth none bad esteeme?


----- 1 MART. 1. xii.  Epig. lxxxii. 2.

We shall not see a man highly regarded, or extraordinarily commended,
that is curiously carefull to have his children well nurtured, because
it is a common {usthem+} action, how just and worthy praise soever it
be, no more than one great tree, where the forrest is full of such.  I
doe not thinke that any Spartane Citizen did boastingly glorifie
himselfe for his valour, because it was a popular vertue in that
nation, and as, little for his fidelity+ and contempt of riches.
There is no recompence falls unto vertue, how great soever it be, if
it once have past into custome; and I wot not whether we might call it
great, being common.  Since then the rewards of honour have no other
prise and estimation than that few enjoy it, there is no way to
disannul them but to make a largesse of them.  Were there now more men
found deserving the same than in former ages, yet should not the
reputation of it be corrupted.  And it may easily happen that more
deserve it, for there is no vertue doth so easily spread it selfe as
military valiancie.  There is another true, perfect, and
philosophicall, whereof I speake not (I use this word according to our
custome), farre greater and more full than this,, which is a force and
assurance of the soule, equally contemning all manner of contrarie
accidents, upright, uniforme, and constant, whereof ours is but an
easie and glimmering raie.  Custome, institution, example and fashion,
may effect what ever they list in the establishing of that I speake
of, and easily make it vulgare, as may plainely be seene by the
experience our civill warres give us of it.  And whosoever could now
joyne us together, and eagerly flesh all our people to a common
enterprise, we should make our ancient military name and chivalrous
credit to flourish againe.  It is most certaine that the recompense of
our order did not in former nines only concerne prowis and respect
valour; it had a further aime.  It was never the reward or payment of
a valiant ssouldier, but of a famous Captaine.  The skill to obey+
could not deserve so honorable an hire; for, cast we back our eyes to
antiquity, we shall perceive that for the worthy obtaining thereof,
there was required more universal warrelike expertnesse, and which
might embrace the greatest part, and most parts of a military
man. Neque enim eaedem militares et imperatoriae artes sunt, 'For the
same arts and parts belong not to a generall and common souldier;' and
who besides that should also be of a fit and accommodable condition
for such a dignitie. But I say, that if more men should now adayes be
found worthy of it than have been heretofore, yet should not ounr
princes be more liberall of it, and it had beene much better not to
bestow it upon all them to whom it was due, than for ever to lose, as
of late we have done, the use of so profitable an invention.  No man
of courage vouchsafeth to advantage himselfe of that which is common
unto many.  And those which in our dayes bee least merited that
honourable recompence, seeme, in all apparence, most to disdaine it,
by that meanes place themselves in the ranke of those to whom the
wrong is offered by unworthy bestowing and vilifying of that badge
which particularly was due unto them.  Now by defacing and abolishing
this to suppose, suddenly to be able to bring into credit and renue a
semblable custome, is no convenient enterprise in so licentious, so
corruptedi and so declining age, as is this wherein we now live.  And
it will come to passe that the last shall even from her birth incur
the incommodities which have lately ruined and overthrowne the other.
The rules of this new orders dispensation had need to be otherwise
wrested and constrained for to give it authority, and this tumultuous
season is not capable of a short and ordered bridle.  Besides, before
a man is able to give credit unto it, it is requisite a man lose the
memory of the first, and of the contempt whereinto it is fallen.  This
place might admit some discourse upon the consideration of valour, and
difference betweene this virtue and others.  But Plutarch having often
spoken of this matter, it were in vaine here for me to repeat what he
says of it.  This is worthy to be considered, that our nation giveth
the chiefe preheminence of all vertue unto valiancie, as the etymology
of the word sheweth, which cometh of valour or worth; and that
according to our received custome, when after the phrase of our court
and nobility we speake of a worthy man, or of an honest man, we
thereby inferre no other thing than a valiant man; after the usuall
Roman fashion. For the generall denomination of vertue doth amongst
them take her etymology of force or might.  The only proper and
essentiall forme of our nobility in France is military_vocation+.  It
is very likely that the first vertue that ever appeared amongst men,
and which to some hath given preheminence over others, hath beene this
by which the strongest and most courageous have become masters over
the weakest, and purchased a particular ranke and reputation to
themselves.  Whereby this honour and dignity of speech is left unto
it: or else these nations, being very warlike, have given the price
unto that of vertues, which was the worthiest and more familiar unto
them.  Even as our passion, and this heart-panting and mind-vexing
carefull diligence, and diligent carefulnesse, which we continually
apprehend about woman's chastity, causeth also that a good woman, an
honest woman, a woman of honour and vertue, doth in effect and
substance signifle no other thing unto us than a chaste wife or woman;
as if to bind them to this duty, we did neglect all others, and give
them free liberty to commit any other fault, to covenant with them
never to quit or forsake this duty.  CHAPTER 2.VIII+ OF THE AFFECTIONS
OF FATHERS TO THEIR CHILDREN.

TO THE LADY OF ESTISSAC

MADAME, if strangenesse doe not save or novelty shield mee, which are
woiat to give things reputation, I shall never, with honesty, quit
myselfe of this enterprise yet is it so fantasticall and bears a shew
so differient from common custome, that that may haply purchase it
free passage.  It is a melancholy humour, and consequently a hatefull
enemy to my natural complexion, bred by the anxietie and produced by
the anguish of carking care, whereinto some years since I cast
myselfe, that first put this humorous conceipt of writing into my
head.  And finding myselfe afterward wholy unprovided of subject, and
void of other matter, I have presented myselfe unto myselfe for a
subject to write and argument to descant upon.  It is the only booke
in the world of this kinde, and of a wilde extravagant designe.
Moreover, there is nothing in it worthy the marking but this
fantasticalnesse.  For, to so vaine a ground and base a subject, the
worlds best workman could never have given a fashion deserving to be
accompted of.  Not (worthy Lady) sithence I must pourtray my selfe to
the life, I should have forgotten a part of importance, if
therewithall I had not represented the honour I have ever yeelded to
your deserts, which I have especially beene willing to declare in the
forefront of this chapter; Forasmuch as amongst your other good parts
and commendable qualities, that of loving amity, which you have shewen
to your children, holdeth one of the first rankes.  Whosoever shall
understand and know the age, wherein your late husband the Lord of
Estissac left you a Widdow, the great, and nonorable matches have
beene offered you (as worthy and as many as to any other Lady in
France of your condition) the constant resolution, and resolute
constancie, wherewith so many yeares you have sustained, and even in
spight or athwart so manifold thorny difficulties, the charge and
conduct of their affaires, which have tossed, turmoyled and removed
you in all comers of France, and still hold you besieged; the happy
and successfull forwardnes you, which only through your wisdome or
good fortune have given them, he will easily say with mee, that in our
age we have no patterne of motherly affecttion more exemplarie than
yours.  I praise God (Madame) it hathe beene so well employed : For,
the good hopes, which the young Lord of REstissac, your sonne, giveth
of himselfe, fore-shew he shall come to an undoubted assurance that
when he shall come to yeares of discretion, you shall reape the
obedience of a noble, and finde the acknowledgement of a good childe.
But because, by reason of his child-hood, he could not take notice of
the exceeding kindnesse and many-fold offices he hath received from
you, my meaning is, that if ever these my compositions shall haply one
day come into his hands (when-peradventure I shall neither have mouth
nor speech to declare it unto him), he receive this testimonie in all
veritie from me; which shall also more lively be testified unto him by
the good effects, (whereof, if so it please God, be shall have a
sensible feeling) that there is no Gentleman in France more endebted
to his mother than he; and that hereafter he cannot yeeld a more
certaine proofe of his goodnes, and testimonie of his vertue, than in
acknowledging and confessing you for such.  If there be any
truly-naturall law, that is to say, any instinct, universally and
perpetually imprinted, both in beasts and us, (which is not without
controversie) I may, according to mine opinion, say, that next to the
care which each living creature hath to his preservation, and to flie
what doth hurt him, the affection which the engenderer beareth his
off-spring holds the second place in this ranke.  And forasmuch as
nature seemeth to have recommended the same unto us, ayming to extend,
encrease, and advance the successive parts or parcels of this her
frame; it is no wonder if backagaine it is not so great from children
unto fathers.  This other Aristotelian consideration remembred: that
hee who doth benefit+ another, loveth him better than hee is beloved
of him againe; and hee to whom a debt is owing, loveth better than hee
that oweth: And every workman loveth his worke better than hee should
bee beloved of it againe, if it had sense or feeling.  Forasmuch as we
love to be, and being consisteth in moving and action; therefore is
every ma-n, in some sort or other.. in his owne workmanship.
Whosoever doth a good deed, exerciseth a faire and honest action:
whosoever receiveth exerciseth only a profitable action.  And profit
is nothing so much to be esteemed or loved as honesty+.{PlainDealer+}
Honesty is firme and permanent, affording him that did it a constant
gratification.  Profit is very slipperie and easily lost, nor is the
memorie of it so sweet or so fresh.  Such things are dearest unto us,
that have cost us most; and to give is of more cost that to take.
Since it hath pleased God to endow us with some capacitie of
discourse, that as beasts we should not servily be subjected to common
lawes, but rather with judgement and voluntary liberty apply ourselves
unto them; we ought somewhat to yeeld unto the simple auctoritie of
Nature, but not suffer her tyranny to carry us away: only reason ought
to have the conduct of our inclinations.  As for me, my tast is
strangely distasted to its propensions, which in us are produced
without the ordinance and direction of our judgement. As upon this
subject I speak of, I cannot receive this passion, wherewith some
embrace children scarsly borne,. having neither motion in the soule,
nor forme well to be distinguished in the body whereby they might make
themselves lovely or amiable.  And I could never well endure to have
them brought up or nursed neere about me.  A true and well ordered
affection ought to be borne and augmented, with the knowledge they owe
us of themselves; and then, if they deserve it (naturall inclination
marching hand in hand with reason) to cherish and make much of them,
with a perfect fatherly love and loving friendship, and conformably to
judge of them if they be otherwise, alwayes yeelding our selves unto
reason, notwithstanding natural power.  For the most part, it goeth
cleane contrary, and commonly we feele our selves more moved with the
sports, idlenesses wantonnesse, and infant- trifles of our children,
than afterward we do with all their actions, when they bee men: As if
we had loved them for our pastimes, as we do apes, monkies, or
perokitoes, and not as man.  And some that liberally furnish them with
sporting bables while they be children, will miserably pinch it in the
least expense for necessaries when they grow men.  Nay, it seemeth
that the jelousie we have to see them appeare into, and injoy the
world, when we are ready to leave them, makes us more sparing and
close-handed toward them.  It vexeth and grieveth us when we see them
following us at our heels, supposing they solicite us to be gone
hence: {Hal+} And if we were to feare that since the order of things
beareth, that they cannot indeed, neither be, nor live, but by our
being and life, we should not meddle to be fathers.  As for mee, I
deeme it a kind of cruelty and injustice, not to receive them into the
share and society of our goods, and to admit them as Partners in the
understanding of our domestical affaires (if they be once capable of
it and not to cut off and shut-up our commodities to provide for
theirs, since we have engendred them to that purpose.  It is meere
injustice to see an old, crazed, sinnow-shronken, and nigh dead father
sitting alone in a Chimny-corner, to enjoy so many goods as would
suffice for the preferment and entertainment of many children, and in
the meane while, for want of meanes, to suffer them to lose their best
dayes and yeares, without thrusting them into publike service and
knowledge of men; whereby they are often cast into dispaire, to seeke,
by some way how unlawfull soever to provide for their necessaries.
And in my dayes, I have seene divers yong-men, of good houses so given
to stealing and filching, that no correction could divert them from
it.  I know one very well alied, to whom, at the instance of a brother
of his (a most honest, gallant, and vertuous Gentleman) I spake to
that purpose, who boldly answered and confessed unto me, that only by
the rigor and covetism of his father he had beene forced and driven to
fall into such lewdnesse and wickednesse.  And even at that time he
came from stealing certaine jewels from a Lady, in whose bed-chamber
he fortuned to come with certaine other Gentlemen when she was rising,
and had almost beene taken.  He made me remember a tale I had heard of
another Gentleman, from his youth so fashioned and inclined to this
goodly trade of pilfering that comming afterward to be heire and Lord
of his owne goods, resolved to give over that manner of life, could
notwithstanding (if he chanced to come neere a shop, where he saw any
thing he stood in need of) not chuse but steale the same, though
afterward he would ever send mony and pay for it.  And I have seene
diverse so inured to that vice, that amongst their companios they
would ordinarily steale such things as they would restore againe.  I
am a Gascoine, and there is no vice wherein I have lesse skill: I hate
it somewhat more by complexion than I accuse it by discourse.  I doe
not so much as desire another mans goods.  And although my
Countrey-men be indeed somewhat more taxed with this fault than other
Provinces of France, yet have we seene, of late dayes, and that sundry
times, men well borne and of good parentage in other parts of France,
in the hands of justice, and lawfully convicted of many most horrible
robberies.  I am of opinion that in regard of these debauches and lewd
actions, fathers may, in some sort, be blamed, and that it is only
long of them.  And if any shall answer mee, as did once a Gentleman of
good worth and understanding, that he thriftily endevoured to hoard up
riches, to no other purpose, nor to have any use and commodity of
them, than to be honoured, respected and suingly sought unto by his
friends and kinsfolke and that age having bereaved him of all other
forces, it was the only remedy he had left to maintaine himselfe in
authority with his houshold, and keepe him from falling into contempyt
and disdaine of all the world. And truly according to Aristotle, not
only old_age+, but each imbecility, is the promoter and motive of
covetousnesse+.  That is something, but it is a remedy for an evill,
whereof the birth should have beene hindered, and breeding avoyded.
That father may truly be said miserable that holdeth the affection of
his children tied unto him by no other meanes than by the need they
have of his helpe, or want of his assistance, if that may be termed
affection: A man should yeeld himselfe respectable by virtue and
sufficiency, and amiable by his goodnesse, and gentlenesse of
manners. The very cinders of so rich a matter have their value: so
have the bones and relics of honourable men, whom we hold in respect
and reverence.  No age can be so crazed and drooping in a man that
hath lived honourably, but must needs prove venerable, and especially
unto his children, whose minds ought so to be directed by the parents,
that reason and wisdome, not necessity and need, nor rudenesse and
compulsion, may make them know and performe their dutie.

  ----- et errat longe, mea quidem sententia,

  Qui imperium credat esse gravius aut stabilius,


  Vi quod fit, quam illud quod amicitia adjungitur./1

  In mine opinion he doth much mistake,

  Who, that command more grave, more firme doth take,

  Which force doth get, than that which friendships make.


I utterly condemne all manner of violence in the education of a young
spirit, brought up to honour and libertie.  There is a kind of
slavishnesse in churlish rigour and servility in compulsion; and I
hold that that which cannot be compassed by reason, wisdome, and
discretion, can never be attained by force and constraint.  So was I
brought up: they tell me that in all my youth I never felt rod but
twice, and that very

----- 1 TER.  Adelph. act i. sc. i, 39.

lightly.  And what education I have had myselfe, the same have l given
mv children.  But such is my ill hap,that they dye all very yong:
{usthem+} yet hath Leonora my only daughter escaped this misfortune,
and attained to the age of six yeares, and somewhat more; for the
conduct of whose youth and punishment childish faults (the indulgence
of her mother applying it selfe very mildly unto it) was never other
meanes used but gentle words. And were my desire frustrate there are
diverse other causes to take hold of without reproving my discipline,
which I know to be just and naturall. I would also have beene much
more religious in that towards male-children, not borne to serve as
women and of a freer condition.  I should have loved to have stored
their minde with ingenuity and liberty.  I have seene no other effects
in rods, but to make childrens mindes more remisse, or more
maliciously headstrong.  Desire we to be loved of our children!  Will
we remove all occasions from them to wish our death? (although no
occasion of so horrible and unnaturall wishes can either be just or
excusable) nullum scelus rationem habet, no ill deed hath a good
reason.  Let us reasonably accommodate their life with such things as
are in our power.  And therefore should not we marry so young that our
age do in a manner confound it selfe with theirs.  For, this
inconvenience doth unavoidably cast us into many difficulties and
encombrances.  This I speake chiefly unto nobility, which is of an
idle disposition, or loitering condition, and which (as we say) liveth
ony by her lands or rents: for else, where life standeth upon gaine,
plurality and company of children is an easefull furtherance of
husbandry.  They are as many new implements to thrive, and instruments
to grow rich.  I was married at thirty yeares of age and commend the
opinion of thirty-five, which is said to be Aristotles.  Plato would
have no man married before thirty, and hath good reason to scoffe at
them that will defer it till after fifty- five and then marry; and
condemneth their breed as unworthy of life and sustenance.  Thales
appointed the best limits, who by his mother being instantly urged to
marry whilest he was young, answered that it was not yet time; and
when he came to be old, he said it was no more time.  A man must
refuse opportunity to every importunate action.  The ancient Gaules
deemed it a shamefull reproach to have the acquaintance of a woman
before the age of twenty yeares; and did especially recommend unto men
that sought to be trained up in warres the carefull preservation of
their maiden-head until they were of good yeares, forsomuch as by
losing it in youth, courages are thereby much weakned and greatly
empaired, and by coupling with women diverted from all vertuous
action. {effeminacy+}

  Ma hor congiunto i giovinetta sposa,

  Lieto homai de' figli', era invilito

  Ne gli afetti di padre et di marito./1

  But now conjoyn'd to a fresh-springing spouse,

  Joy'd in his children, he was thought-abased,

  In passions twixt a sire and husband placed.

Muleasses King of Thunes, he whom the Emperor Charles the fifth
restored unto his owne state againe, was wont to upbraid his fathers
memorie for so dissolutely-frequenting of women, {Gloucester+} terming
him a sloven, effeminate, and a lustfull engenderer of children. The
Greek storie doth note Iccus the Tarentine, Crisso, Astyllus,
Diopompus, and others, who to keep their bodies tough and strong for
the service of the Olympicke courses, wrestlings and such bodily
exercises they did, as long as they were possessed with that care,
heedefully abstaine from all venerian acts and touching of women.  In
a certaine country of the Spanish Indies, no man was suffered to take
a wife before he were thirtie yeares old, and women might marry at ten
yeares of age.  There is no reason, neither is it convenient, that a
Gentleman of five and thirtie yeares should give place to his sonne,
that is but twenty: For then is the father as seemly and may as well
appear and set himselfe forward, in all manner of voyages of warres as
well by

----- 1 TASSO, Gierus. x. 39.

land as sea, and doe his prince as good service, in court or
elsewhere, as his sonne: He hath need of all his parts and ought truly
to impart them, but so that be forget not himselfe for others: And to
such may justly that answer serve which fathers have commonly in their
mouthes: 'I will not put off my clothes before I be ready to go to
bed.  But a father over- burthened with yeares and crazed through
sicknesse and by reason of weaknesse and want of health barred from
the common society of men, doth both wrong himself, injure his, idly
and to no use to hoord up and keepe close a great heape of riches and
deal of pelfe.  He is in state good enough, if he be wise to have a
desire to put off his clothes to goe to bed.  I will not say to his
shirt, but to a good warme night gowne, As for other pomp and trash
whereof hee hath no longer use or need, hee ought willingly to
distribute and bestow them amongst those to whom by naturall degree
they ought to belong.  It is reason he should have the use and
bequeath the fruition of them, since nature doth also deprive him of
them, otherwise without doubt there is both envy and malice stirring.
The worthiest action that ever the Emperour Charles the fifth
performed was this, in imitation of some ancients of his quality, that
he had the discretion to know that reason commanded us to strip or
shift our selves when our cloathes trouble and are too heavy for us,
and that it is high time to go to bed when our legs faile
us. {usthem+} He resigned his meanes, his greatnesse and Kingdome to
his Sonne, at what time he found his former undanted resolution to
decay, and force to conduct his affaires to droope in himselfe,
together with the glory he had thereby acquired.

  Solve senescentem mature sanus equum ne

  Peccet ad extremum ridentus, et ilia ducat./1

  If you be wise, the horse growne-old betimes cast-off,

  Lest he at last fall lame, foulter, and breed a skoffe.

  This fault for a man not to be able to know himselfe betimes and not
  to feele the impuissance and extreme


----- 1 HOR. 1. i.  Epist. i. 8.

alteration that age doth naturally bring, both to the body and the
minde (which in my opinion is equall if the mind hath but one halfe),
hath lost the reputation of the most part of the great men in the
world.  I have in my dayes both seene and familiarly knowen some men
of great authority, whom a man might easily discerne, to be strangely
fallen from that ancient sufficiency, which I know by the reputation
they had thereby attained unto in their best yeares.  I could
willingly for their honors sake have wisht them at home about their
own businesse, discharged from all negotiations of the commonwealth
and employments of war that were no longer fit for them.  I have
sometimes beene familiar in a Gentleman's house, who was both an old
man and a widdower, yet lusty of his age.  This man had many daughters
marriageable and a sonne grown to mans state and ready to appeare in
the world; a thing that drew-on and was the cause of great charges and
many visitations, wherein he tooke but little pleasure, not only for
the continuall care hee had to save but more by reason of his age, hee
had betoken himselfe to a manner of life farre different from ours.  I
chanced one day to tell him somewhat boldly (as my custome is) {Kent+}
that it would better beseeme him to give us place and resigne his
chiefe house to his sonne (for he had no other mannor-house
conveniently well furnished), and quietly retire himselfe to some
farme of his where no man might trouble him or disturbe his rest,
since he could not otherwise avoid our importunitie, seeing the
condition of his children; who afterward followed my counsell and
found great ease by it.  It is not to be said that they hate any thing
given them by such a way of obligation, which a man may not recall
againe: I, that am ready to play such a part, would give over unto
them the full possession of my house and enjoying of my good and
limited condition as if they should give me occasion, I might repent
myself of my gift and revoke my deed. I would leave the use and
fruition of all unto them, the rather because it were no longer fit
for me to weald the same.  And touching the disposing of all matters
in grosse, I would reserve what I pleased unto my selfe.  Having ever
judged that it must be a great contentment to an aged father, himselfe
to direct his children in the government of his household affaires,
and to be able whilest himselfe liveth to checks and controule their
demeanors, storing them with instruction and advised counsell,
according to the experience he hath had of them, and himselfe to
address the ancient honour and order of his house in the hands of his
successours, and that way warrant himselfe of the hope hee may
conceive of their future conduct and or successe.  And to this effect
I would not shun their company.  I would not be far from them, but as
much as the condition of my age would permit, enjoy and be a partner
of their sports, mirths, and feasts.  If I did not continually live
amongst them (as I could not well without offending their meetings and
hindering their recreation, by reason of the peevish. forwardnesse of
my age and the trouble of my infirmities, and also without forcing
their rules, and resisting the forme of life I should then follow), I
would at least live neere them, in some corner of my house, not the
best and fairest in show, but the most easefull and commodious. And
not, as some years since I saw a Deane of S.  Hillarie of Poictiers,
reduced by reason and the incommoditie of his melancholy to such a
continuall solitarinesse, that when I entered into his chamber be had
never removed one step out of it in two and twenty yeares before; yet
had all his faculties free and easie, onely a rheume excepted that
fell into his stomacke.  Scarce once a weeke would he suffer any body
to come and see him.  Hee would ever be shut up in his chamber all
alone, where no man should come, except a boy, who once a day brought
him meat, and who might not tarry there, but as soone as he was in
must goe out again.  All his exercise was sometimes to walke up and
downe his chamber, aud now and then reade on some booke (for he had
some understanding of letters) but obstinately resolved to live and
dye in that course, as he did shortly after.  I would endevour by a
kinde of civil demeanour and milde conversation to breede and settle
in my children a true-harty loving friendship, and unfained good will
towards me: a thing easily obtained amongst well-borne mindes, For if
they prove, or be such surly-furious beasts, or given to churlish
disobedience, as our age bringeth forth thousands, they must as beasts
be hated, as churls neglected, and as degenerate avoided.  I hate this
custome, to forbid children to call their fathers father, and to teach
them another strange name, as of more reverence; as if nature had not
sufficiently provided for our authoritie. We call God Almighty by the
name of father, and disdaine our children should call us so.  I have
reformed this fault in mine owne household.  It is also folly and
injustice to deprive children, especially being of competent age, of
their fathers familiaritie, and ever to shew them a surly, austere,
grim, and disdainefall countenance, hoping thereby, to keepe them in
awfull feare and duteous obedience.  For it is a very unprofitable
proceedingy and which maketh fathers yrkesome unto children, and which
is worse, ridiculous. They have youth and strength in their hands, and
consequently the breath and favour of the world; and doe with mockery
and contempt receive these churlish, fierce, and tyrannical
countenances, from a man that hath no lusty bloud left him, neither in
his heart nor in his vaines; meere bugbeares, and scar crowes, to
scare birdes withall.  If it lay in my power to make my selfe feared,
I had rather make my selfe beloved. {tyrant+} There are so many sorts
of defects in age, and so much impuissance; it is so subject to
contempt, that the best purchase it can make is the good will, love
and affection of others. {Koffka+} Commandement and feare are no
longer her weapons.  I have knowne one whose youth had beene very
imperious and rough, but when he came to mans age, although hee live
in as good plight and health as may be, yet he chaseth, he scoldeth,
he brawleth, he fighteth, he sweareth, and biteth, as the most
boistrous and tempestuous master of France; he frets and consumes
hims-elfe with carke and care and vigilancy (all which is but a
jugling and ground for his familiar to play upon, and cozen him the
more) as for his goods, his garners, his cellars, his coffers, yea his
purse, whilst himselfe keepes the keyes of them close in his bosome
and under his boulster, as charily as he doth his eyes, other enjoy
and command the better part of them; whilst he pleaseth and flattereth
himselfe with the niggardly sparing of his table, all goth to wracke,
and is lavishly wasted in divers corners of his house, in play, in
riotous spending, and in soothingly entertaining the accompts or tales
of his vaine chasing, foresight, and providing.  Every man watcheth
and keepeth sentinell against him, if any silly or heedless servant
doe by fortune apply himselfe unto it, he is presently made to suspect
him. A quality on which age doth immediately bite of it selfe.  How
many times hath he vaunted and applauding himselfe the strict orders
of his house, of his good husbandry, of the awe he kept his household
in, and of the exact obedience and regardfull reverence he received of
all his family, and how cleare-sighted he was in his own businesse:

  Ille solus nescit omnia./1

  Of all things none but he,

  Most ignorant must be.

I know no man that could produce more parts, both naturall and
artificiall, fit to preserve his masterie, and to maintaine his
absolutenesse, than be doth; yet is hee cleane falne from them like a
childe.  Therefore have I made choice of him amongst many such
conditions that I know, as most exemplare.  It were a matter beseeming
a scholasticall question, whether it be better so or otherwise.  In
his presence all things give place unto him.  This vaine course is
ever left unto his authority, that he is never gain-said.  He is had
in awe, he is feared, he is beleeved, he is respected his belly-full,
Doth he discharge any boy or servant? he presently trusseth up his
packe, then he is gone;

----- 1 TER.  Adel. act iv. sc. 21 9.

but whither? onely out of his sight, not out of his house.  The steps
of age are so slow, the senses so troubled, the minde so distracted,
that he shall live and doe his office a whole year in one same house,
and never be perceived.  And when fit time or occasion serveth,
letters are produced from farre places, humbly suing and pittifully
complayning, with promises to doe better and to amend, by which he is
brought into favour and office again.  Doth the master make any
bargaine or dispatch that pleaseth not, it is immediately smothered
and supressed soon after forging causes, and devising colourable
excuses, to excuse the want of execution or answer. No forraine
letters being first presented unto him, he seeth but such as are fit
for his knowledge. lf peradventure they come into his hands, as he
that trusteth some one of his men to reade them unto him, he will
presently devise what he thinketh good, whereby they often invent that
such a one seemeth to aske him forgivenesse, that wrongeth him by his
letter.  To conclude, he never lookes into his owne businesse, but by
a disposed, designed and as much as may be pleasing image, so
contrived by such as are about him, because they will not stirre up
his choler, move his impatience, and exasperate his frowardnesse.  I
have seene under different formes many long and constant, and of like
effect, economies.  It is ever proper unto women to be readily bent to
contradict and crosse their husbands.  They will with might and maine,
hand over head, take hold of any colour oG thwart and withstand them:
the first excuse they meet with serves them as a plenary
justification. I have seene some that would in grosse steale from
their husbands to the end (as they told their Confessor) they might
give the greater almes.  Trust you to such religious dispensations.
They thinke no libertie to have or managing to possesse sufficient
authoritie, if it come from their husbands consent: They must
necessarily usurpe it, either by wily craft or maine force, and ever
iniuriouslv, thereby to give it more grace and authoritie. As in my
discourse, when it is against a poore old man, and for children, then
take they hold of this title, and therewith gloriously serve their
turne and passion, and as in a common servitude, easily usurpe and
monopolize against his government and domination.  If they be
men-children, tall, of good spirit, and forward, then they presently
suborne, either by threats, force, or favour, both Steward, Bailiffe,
Clarke, Receiver, and all the Fathers Officers, and Servant.  Such as
have neither wife nor children, do more hardly fall into his
mischiefe; but yet more cruelly and unworthily.  Old Cato was wont to
say, 'So many servants, so many enemies.  Note whether according to
the distance that was between the purity of his age, and the
corruption of our times, he did not fore-warne us that wives,
children, and servants are to us so many enemies.  Well fits it
decrepitude to store us with the sweet benefit of ignorance and
unperceiving facility wherewith we are deceived. If we did yeeld unto
it, what would become of us?  Doe we not see that even then if we have
any suits in lawe, or matters to be decided before Judges, both
Lawyers+ and Judges will commonly take part with and favour our
childrens causes against us, as men interested in the same?  And if I
chance not to spy or plainly perceive how I am cheated, cozoned and
beguiled, I must of necessitie discover in the end how I am subject,
and may be cheated, beguiled, and cozened.  And shall the tongue of
man ever bee able to expresse the ynvaluable worth of a friend+, in
comparison of these civill bonds? The lively image and idea whereof I
perceive to be among beasts so unspotted. Oh, with what religion doe I
respect and observe the same!  If others deceive me, yet do I not
deceive my selfe, to esteeme my selfe capable and of power to looke
unto my selfe, nor to trouble my braines to yeeld my selfe unto it.  I
doe beware and keepe my selfe from such treasons, and cunny- catching
in mine owne bosome, not by an unquiet and tumultuary curiosity, but
rather by a diversion and resolution.  When I heare the state of any
one reported or discoursed of, I ammuse not my selfe on him, but
presently cast mine eyes on my selfe, and all my wits together, to see
in what state I am, aud how it goeth with me.  Whatsoever concerneth
him, the same hath relation to me.  His fortunes forewarne me, and
summon up my spirits that way; There is no day nor houre but we speake
that of others we might properly speake of ourselves, could we as well
enfold as we can infold our consideration. {common+} And many authours
doe in this manner wound the protection of their cause by over- rashly
running against that which they take hold of, thirling such darts at
their enemies that might with much more advantage be cast at them.
The Lord of Montluc, late one of the Lord Marshals of France, having
lost his sonne, who died in the Iland of Madera, a worthy, forward and
gallant young gentleman, and truely of good hope, amongst other his
griefes and regrets did greatly move me to condole the infinite
displeasure and hearts- sorrow that he felt, inasmuch as he had never
communicated and opened himselfe vnto him: for, with his austere
humour and continuall endevouring to hold a grimme-stern-fatherly
gravity over him, he had lost the meanes perfectly to finde and
throughly to know his sonne, and so to manifest vnto him the extreme
affection he bare him, and the worthy judgement he made of his
vertue. 'Alas,' was he wont to say, 'the poore lad saw never anything
in me but a severe-surly countenance, full of disdaine, and haply was
possessed with this conceit, that I could neither love nor esteeme him
according to his merits.  Ay- me, to whom did I reserve, to discover
that singular and loving affection which in my soule I bare vnto him?
Was it not he that should have had all the pleasure and
acknowledgenient thereof?  I have forced and tormented my selfe to
maintaine this vaine maske, and have vtterly lost the pleasure of his
conversation, and therwithal his good will, which surely was but
faintly cold towards me, forsomuch as he never received but rude
entertainement of me, and never felt but a tyrannicall proceeding in
me towards him.  I am of opinion his complaint was reasonable and well
grounded.  For, as I know by certaine experience, there is no comfort
so sweet in the losse of friends, as that our owne knowledge or
conscience tels vs we never omitted to tell them everything, and
expostulate all matters vnto them, and to have had a perfect and free
communication with them. Tell me, my good friend, am I the better or
the worse by having a taste of it?  Surely I am much the better.  His
griefe doth both comfort and honour mee.  Is it not a religious and
pleasing office of my life for ever to make the obsequies thereof?
Can there be any pleasure worth this privation? I doe vnfold and open
my self as much as I can to mine owne people, and willingly declare
the state of my will and judgment towards them, as commonly I doe
towards all men: I make haste to produce and present my selfe, for I
would have no man mistake me, in what part soever.  Amongst other
particular customes which our ancient Gaules had as Caesar affirmeth),
this was one, that children never came before their fathers, nor were
in any publike assembly seene in their company, but when they began to
beare armes: as if they would infer that then was the time fathers
should admit them to their acquaintance and familiarity.  I have also
observed another kinde of indiscretion in some fathers of our times,
who during their owne life would never be induced to acquaint or
impart vnto their children that share or portion which, by the Law of
Nature, they were to have in their fortunes: nay, some there are who,
after their death, bequeath and commit the same auctority over them
and their goods, vnto their wives, with full power and law to dispose
of them at their pleasure.  And my selfe have knowen a Gentleman, a
chiefe officer of our crowne, that by right and hope of succession
(had he lived unto it) was to inherit above fifty thousand crownes a
yeere good land, who at the age of more then fifty yeeres, fell into
such necessity and want, and was run so farre in debt, that he had
nothing left him, and, as it is supposed, died for very need: whilest
his mother, in her extreme decrepitude, enjoyed all his lands and
possessed all his goods, by vertue of his fathers will and testament,
who had lived very neere foure-score years: a thing (in my conceit) no
way to be commended, but rather blamed.  Therefore doe I thinke that a
man but little advantaged or bettered in estate who is able to liue of
himselfe, and is out of debt, especially if he have children, and
goeth about to marry a wife that must have a great joynter out of his
lands, assuredly there is no other debt that brings more ruine vnto
houses than that.  My predecessors have commonly followed this
counsell, and so have I, and all have found good by it.  But those
that disswade vs from marrying of rich wives, lest they might proove
over disdainefull and peevish, or lesse tractable and loving, are also
deceived to make vs neglect and for-goe a reall commoditie for so
frivolous a conjecture, To an vnreasonable woman, it is all one cost
to her whether they passe vnder one reason or vnder another. 'They
love to be where they are most wronged.  Injustice doth allure them,
as the honour of their vertuous actions enticeth the good.  And by how
much richer they are, so much more milde and gentle are they; as more
willingly and gloriously chaste, by how much fairer they are.  Some
colour of reason there is, men should leave the administration of
their goods and affaires vnto mothers whilest their children are not
of competent age, or fit according to the lawes to manage the charge
of them: And ill hath their father brought them vp, if he cannot hope,
these comming to yeares of discretion, they shal have no more wit,
reason, and sufficiencie, than his wife, considering the weaknesse of
their sexe.  Yet truly were it as much against nature so to order
things that mothers must wholy depend on their childrens discretion.
They ought largely and competently to be provided wherewith to
maintaine their estate according to the quality of their house and
age: because 'need and want is much more unseemely and hard to he
indured in women than in men:' And children rather than mothers ought
to be charged therewith.  In generall, my opinion is that the best
distribution of goods is, when we die, to distribute them according to
the custome of the Country.  The lawes have better thought vpon them
than we: And better is it to let them erre in their election than for
vs rashly to hazard to faile in ours.  They are not properly our owne,
since without vs, and by a civil prescription, they are appointed to
certaine successours.  And albeit we have some further liberty, I
thinke it should be a great and most apparent cause to induce vs to
take from one, and barre him from that which Fortune hath allotted
him, and the common lawes and Justice hath called him unto: And that
against reason we abuse this liberty, by suting the same unto our
priuate humours and frivolous fantasies.  My fortune hath beene good,
inasmuch as yet it never presented me with any occasions that might
tempt or divert my affections from the common and lawful ordinance.  I
see some towards whom it is but labour lost, carefully to endevour to
doe any good offices.  A word ill taken defaceth the merit of ten
yeeres.  Happy he that, at this last passage, is ready to sooth and
applaud their will.  The next action transporteth him; not the best
and most frequent offices, but the freshest and present worke the
deede.  They are the people that play with their wils and testaments
as with apples and rods, to gratify or chastize every action of those
who pretend any interest thereunto.  It is a matter of over-long
pursute, and of exceeding consequence, at every instance to be thus
dilated, and wherein the wiser sort establish themselves once for all,
chiefely respecting reason and publike observance.  We somewhat
over-much take these masculine substitutions to hart, and propose a
ridiculous eternity unto our names.  We also over-weight such vaine
future conjectures, which infant-spirits give vs.  It might
peradventure have beene from out my rancke, because I was the dullest,
the slowest, the unwillingest, the most leaden-pated to learn my
lesson or any good, that ever was not onely of all my brethren, but of
all the children in my countrie, were the lesson concerning my
exercise of the minde or body.  It is follie to trie any
extraordinarie conclusions vpon the trust of their divinations+,
wherein we are so often deceived.  If this rule may be contradicted,
and the destinies corrected, in the choice they have made of our
heires, with so much more apparence, may it be done in consideration
of some remarkable and enormous corporall deformtie; a constant and
incorrigible vice; and according to vs great esteemers of beautie; a
matter of important prejudice.  The pleasant dialogue of Plato the
law-giver, with his citizens, will much honour this passage: "Why
then,' say they, perceiving their end to approach, 'shall we not
dispose of that which, is our owne towhom and according as we please?
O Gods, what cruelty is this?  That it shall not be lawfull for us to
give or bequeath more or lesse, according to our fantasies, to such as
have served us, and taken paines with us in our sicknesses, in our
age, and in our business? To whom the law-giver answereth in this
manner: 'My friends,' saith he, 'who doubtlesse shall shortly die, it
is a hard matter for you both to know yourselves and what is your's
according to the Delphike inscription: As for me, who am the maker of
your lawes, I am of opinion that neither yourselves are your owne, nor
that which you enjoy. {property+} And both you and your goods, past
and to come, belong to your familie; and, moreover, both your families
and your goods are the common_wealths+.  Wherefore, lest any
flatterer, either in your age or in time of sickness, or any other
passion, should unadvisedly induce you to make any unlawfull
conveyance or unjust will and testament, I will looke to you and keepe
you from it. But having an especiall respect both to the universall
interest of your Citie, and particular state of your houses, I will
establish lawes, and by reason make you perceive and confesse that a
particular commoditie ought to yeeld to a publike benefit.  Follow
that course meerely whereto humane necessitie doth call you.  To me it
belongeth, who have no more regard to one thing than to another, and
who, as much as I can, take care for the general, to have a regardful
respect of that which you leave behind you.  But to return to my
former discourse, me thinkes we seldome see that woman borne to whom
the superioritie or majestie over men is due, except the motherly and
naturall; unlesse it be for the chastisement of such as by some
fond-febricitant humour have voluntarily submitted themselves unto
them: But that doth nothing concerne old women, of whom we speake
here.  It is the apparence of this consideration hath made us to frame
and willingly to establish this law (never seene elsewhere) that
barreth women from the succession of this crowne, and there are few
principalities in the world where it is not alleaged, as wel as here,
by a likely and apparent reason, which authoriseth the same.  But
fortune hath given more credit unto it in some places than in other
some.  It is dangerous to leave the dispensation of our succession
unto their judgement, according to the choyse they shall make of their
children, which is most commonly unjust and fantasticall.  For the
same unrulie appetite and distasted relish, or strange longings, which
they have when they are great with child, the same have they at al
times in their minds.  They are commonly seene to affect the weakest,
the simplest and most abject, or such, if they have any, that had more
need to sucke. For, wanting reasonable discourse to chuse, and embrace
what they ought, they rather suffer themselves to be directed where
nature's impressions are most single as other creatures, which take no
longer knowledge of their yonng ones than they are sucking.  Moreover,
experience doth manifestly shew unto us that the same naturall
affection to which we ascribe so much authoritie, hath but a weake
foundation.  For a very small gaine we daily take mothers owne
children from them and induce them to take charge of ours.  Doe we not
often procure them to bequeath their children to some fond, filthie,
sluttish, and unhealthie nurce, to whom we would be very loth to
commit ours, or to some brutish goat, not onely forbidding them to
nurce and feed their owne children, what danger soever may betide
them, but also to have any care of them, to the end they may the more
diligently follow and carefully attend the service of ours? Whereby
wee soone see through custome a certaine kinde of bastard affection to
be engendered in them, more vehement than the naturall, and to be much
more tender and carefull for the welfare and preservation of other
men's children than for their owne.  And the reason why I have made
mention of goats is, beeause it is an ordinarie thing round about me
where I dwell to see the countrie women, when they have not milke
enough to feed their infants with their owne breasts, to call for
goats to helpe them.  And myselfe have now two lackies wayting on me,
who except it were eight daies never suck't other milk than goats.
They are presently to come at call and give young infants sucke, and
become so well acquainted with their voice that when they heare them
crie they runne forthwith unto them.  And if by chance they have any
other child put to their teats then their nurseling, they refuse and
reject him, and so doth the child a strange goat.  Myselfe saw that
one not long since, from whom the father tooke a goat, which he had
sucked two or three daies, because he had but borrowed it of one of
his neighbours, who could never be induced to sucke any other, whereby
he shortly died, and, as I verily thinke, of meere hunger. {usthem+}
Beasts, as well as we, doe soon alter, and easily bastardize their
naturall affection. I believe that in that which Herodotus reporteth
of a certaine province of Libia, their often followeth great error
and- mistaking.  He saith that men doe indifferently use, and as it
were in common frequent women, and that the childe, as soone as he is
able to goe, comming to any solemne meetings and great assemblies, led
by a naturall instinct, findeth out hes owne father; where being
turned loose in the middest of the multitude, looke what man the
childe: doth first addresse his steps unto, and then goe to him, the
same is ever afterward reputed to be his right father. Now if we shall
duly consider this simple occasion of loving our children, because we
have begotten them, for which we mu them our other selves; it seemes
there is another production coming from us, and which is of no lesse
recommendation and consequence.  For what we engender by the minde,
the fruits of our courage, sufficiencie, or spirit, are brought forth
by a far more noble part than the corporall, and more our owne.  We
are both father and mother together in this generation; such fruits
cost us much dearer and bring us more honour, and chiefly if they have
any good or rare thing in them.  For the value of our other children
is much more theirs than ours.  The share we have in them is but
little, but of these all the beautie, all the grace, and all the worth
is ours.  And therefore do they represent and resemble us much more
lively than others.  Plato addeth, moreover, that these are immortant
issues, and immortalize their fathers, yea and desire them, as
Licurgus, Solon, and Minos.  All histories being full of examples of
this mutuall friendship of fathers toward their children, I have not
thought it amisse to set downe some choice ones of this kinde.
Heliodorus, that good Bishop of Tricea, loved rather to lose the
dignity, profit, and devotion of so venerable a prelateship than to
forgoe his daughter, a young woman to this day commended for her
beautie, but haply somewhat more curiously and wantonly pranked up
than beseemed the daughter of a churchman and a Bishop, and of
over-amorous behaviour.  There was one Labienus, in Rome, a man of
great worth and authority, and amongst other commendable qualities,
most excellent in all manner of learning, who, as I thinke, was the
sonne of that great Labienus, chiefe of all the captaines that
followed and were under Caesar in the warres against the Gaules, and
who afterward taking great Pompey's part, behaved himselfe so
valiantly and so constantly, that he never forsooke him untill Caesar
defeated hm@ in Spaine.  This Labienus, of whom I spake, had many that
envied his vertues: but above all, as it is likely, courtiers, and
such as in his time were favored of the Emperors, who hated his
franknesse,{PlainDealer+} his fatherly humors, and distaste he bare
still against tyrannie, wherewith it may be supposed he had stuffed
his bookes and compositions.  His adversaries vehemently pursued him
before the magistrate of Rome, and prevailed so far that many of his
works which he had published were condemned to be burned.  He was the
first on whom this new example of punishment was put in practice,
which after continued long in Rome, and executed on divers others, to
punish learning, studies, and writings with death and consuming fire.
There were neither means enough, or matter sufficient of crueltie,
unlesse we had entermingled among them things which nature hath
exempted from all sense and sufferance, as reputation, and the
inventions of our minde: and except we communicated corporall
mischiefs unto disciplines and monuments of the muses.  Which losse
Labienus could not endure, nor brooke to survive those his deare and
highly-esteemed issues, and therefore caused himselfe to be carried,
and shut up alive within his authors monument, where, with a
dreadlesse resolution, he at once provided both to kill himselfe and
be buried together.  It is hard to shew any more vehement fatherly
affection than that.  Cassius Severus, a most eloquent man, and his
familiar friend, seeing his bookes burnt, exclaimed, that by the same
sentenee hee should therewithall be condemned to be burned alive, for
hee still bare and kept in minde what they contained in them. A like
accident happened to Geruntius Cordus, who was accused to have
commended Brutus and Cassius in his bookes.  That base, senile, and
corrupted Senate, and worthie of a farre worse master than Tiberius,
adjudged his writings, to be consumed by fire; and he was pleased to
accompany them in their death, for he pined away by abstaining from
all manner of meat.  That notable man Lucane, being adjudged by that
lewd varlet, Nero, to death, at the latter end of his life, when al
his bloud was well-nigh spent from out the veins of his arme, which by
his physician he had caused to be opened to hasten his death, and that
a chilling cold began to seize the uttermost parts of his limbes, and
approach his vital spirits, the last thing he had in memory was some
of his owne verses, written in his booke of the Pharsalian warres,
which with a distinct voice hee repeated, and so yeelded up the ghost,
having those last words in his mouth.  What was that but a kinde,
tender, and fatherly farewell which he tooke of his children?
representing the last adiewes, and parting embracements, which at our
death we give vnto our dearest issues?  And an effect of that naturall
inclination, which in that last extremity puts us in minde of those
things which in our life we have held dearest and most precious?
Shall we imagine that Epicurus, who (as himselfe said) dying tormented
with the extreme paine of the chollik, had all his comfort in the
beauty of the doctrine which he left behinde him in the world, would
have received as much contentment of a number of well-borne and
better-bred children (if he had had any) as he did of the production
of his rich compositions?  And if it had beene in his choise, to leave
behind him either a counterfeit, deformed, or ill-borne childe, or a
foolish, triviall, and idle booke, not onely he, but all men in the
world besides of like learning and sufficiency, would much rather have
chosen to incurre the former than the latter mischiefe.  It might
peradventure be deemed impiety in Saint Augustine (for example- sake)
if on the one part one should propose unto him to bury all his bookes,
whence our religion receiveth so much good, or to interre his children
of in case he had any) that he would not rather chuse to bury his
children, or the issue of his loynes, than the fruits of his minde.
And I wot not well, whether my selfe should not much rather desire to
beget and produce a perfectly-well-shaped and excellently-qualited
infant, by the acquaintance of the Muses than by the acquaintance of
my wife.  Whatsoever I give to this, let the world allow of it as it
please, I give it as purely and irrevocable as any man can give it to
his corporall children.  That little good which I have done him is no
longer in my disposition.  He may know many things that my selfe know
no longer, and hold of me what I could not hold my selfe: and which
(if need should require) I must borrow of him as of a stranger.  If I
be wiser than be, he is richer than I.  There are few men given unto
Poesie that would not esteeme it for a greater honour to be the
fathers of Virgils AEneidos than of the goodliest boy in Rome, and
that would not rather endure the losse of the one than the perishing
of the other.  For, according to Aristotle, 'Of all workemen, the Poet
is principally the most amorous of his productions and conceited of
his Labours.  It is not easie to be beleeved that Epaminondas, who
wanted to leave some daughters behind him, which unto all posterity,
should one day highly honour their father (they were the two famous
victories which be had gained of the Lacedemonians) would ever have
given his free consent to change them with the best-borne, most
gorgeous, and goodliest damsels of all Greece: or that Alexander and
Caesar did ever wish to be deprived of the greatnesse of their
glorious deeds of warre, for the commodity to have children and heires
of their owne bodies, how absolutely-perfect and well accomplished so
ever they might be.  Nay, I mahe a great question whether Phidias, or
any other excellent Statuary, would as highly esteeme and dearely love
the preservation and successfull continuance of his naturall children,
as be would an exquisite and matchlesse-wrought Image, that with long
study and diligent care he had perfected according unto art.  And as
concerning those vicious and furious passions which sometimes have
inflamed some fathers to the love of their daughters, or mothers
towards their, sonnes, the very same and more partially-earnest is
also found in this other kinde of childe-bearing and aliance.
Witnesse that which is reported of Pigmalion, who having curiously
framed a goodly statue of a most singularly-beauteous woman, was so
strange- fondly and passionately surprised with the lustfull love of
his owne workmanship that the Gods through his raging importunity were
faine in favour of him to give it life.

  Tentatum mollescit ebur, positogue rigore

  Subsidit digitis./1

  As he assaid it, th' ivory softned much,

  And (hardnesse left) did yeeld to fingers touch.


----- 1 OVID.  Metam 1. x. 283.

CHAPTER 2.IX+

OF THE PARTHIANS ARMES IT is a vitious, fond, fashion of the Nobility
and Gentry of our age, and full of nice-tendernesse, never to betake
themselves to armes, except upon some urgent and extreme necessitie:
and to quit them as soone as they perceive the least hope or apparence
that the danger is past; Whence ensue many disorders, and
inconveniences: For, every one running and calling for his armes when
the alarum is given, some have not yet buckled their cuirace when
their fellowes are already defeated.  Indeed our forefathers would
have their Caske, Lance, Gantlets, and Shields carried, but so long as
the service lasted, themselves would never leave-off their other
peeces. Our troopes are now all confounded and disordered, by reason
of bag and baggage, of carriages of lackies, and foot-boies, which
because of their masters armes they carry, can never leave them.
Titus Livius, speaking of the French, saith, Intolerantissima laboris
corpora vix arma humeris gerebant: Their bodies most impatient of
labour could hardly beare armour on their backes. /1 Divers Nations,
as they did in former times, so yet at this day, are seene to goe to
the warres, without any thing about them, or if they had, it was of no
defence; but were all naked and bare.

  Tegmina quas capitum raptus de subere cortex./2

  Whose caske to cover all their head,

  Was made of barke from Corke-tree flea'd.


Alexander, the most daring and hazardous Captain

----- 1 LIV.  Dec. i. 1. 10. 2 VIR.  AEn. 1. 742.

that ever was, did very seldome arme himselfe: And those which amongst
us neglect them, doe not thereby much empaire their reputation.  If
any man chance to be slaine for want of an armour, there are as many
more that miscarry with the over-heavy burthen of their armes, and by
them are engaged, and by a counterbutte are brused, or otherwise
defeated.  For in truth to see the unweildy weight of our and their
thicknesse, it seemeth we but endevour to defend our selves, and we
are rather charged than covered by them.  We have enough to doe to
endure the burthen of them, and are so engived and shackled in them,
as if we were to fight but with the shocke or brunt of our armes, and
as if we were as much bound to defend them as they to shield
us. {Agincourt+} Cornelius Tacitus doth pleasantly quip and jest at
the men of war of our ancient Gaules, so armed, only to maintaine
themselves, as they that have no meane either to offend or to be
offended, or to raise themselves being overthrowne.  Lucullus seeing
certaine Median men at armes, which were in the front of Tigranes
Army, heavily and unweildily armed, as in an iron prison, apprehended
thereby an opinion that he might easily defeat them, and began to
charge them first, and got the victory.  And now that our Muskettiers,
are in such credit, I thinke we shall have some invention found to
immure us up, that so we may be warranted from them, and to traine us
to the warres in Skonces and Bastions, as those which our fathers
caused to be carried by Elephants.  A humour farre different from that
of Scipio the younger, who sharply reprooved his souldiers because thy
had scattered certaine Calthrops under the water alongst a dike, by
which those of the Towne that he had besieged might sally out upon
him, saying, that those which assailed should resolve to enterprise
and not to feare: And had some reason to feare that this provision
might secure and lull their vigilancy asleepe to guard themselves.
Moreover he said to a young man, that shewed him a faire shield he
had, 'Indeed good youth, it is a faire one; but a Roman souldier ought
to have more confidence in his

  right hand than in his left.  It is onely custome that makes the
  burthen of our armes intolerable unto us.

  L'usbergo in dosso haveano, e l'elmo in testa,

  Due di quelli guerrier dei quali io canto.

  Ne notte o di dopo ch'entraro in questa

  Stanza, gl'haveano mai messi da canto;

  Che facile a portar come la resta

  Era lor, perche in vso l'havean tanto.

  Cuirasse on backe did those two warriors beare,

  And caske on head, of whom I make report,

  Nor day, nor night, after they entred there,

  Had they them laid aside from their support

  They could with ease them as a garment weare,

  For long time had they usde them in such sort.

The Emperour Caracalla in leading of his Army was ever wont to march
afoot armed at all assaies.  The Roman footmen caried not their
motions, sword, and target only, as for other armes (saith Cicero)
they were so accustomed to weare them continually, that they hindered
them no more than their limbs: Arma enim, membra militia esse dicunt:
for they say, armor and weapon are a souldiers limbs; but therewithal
such victuals as they should need for a fortnight and a certaine
number of stakes to make their rampards or palisadoes with, so much as
weighed three score pound weight.  And Marius, his souldiers thus
loden, marching in battal array, were taught to march five leagues in
five hours, yea six if need required.  Their military discipline was
much more laboursome than ours: so did it produce far different
effects.  Scipio the younger, reforming his army in Spaine, appointed
his souldiers to eat no meat but standing, and nothing sodden or
rosted.  It is worth there membrance how a Lacedemonian+ souldier
being in an expedition of warre, was much noted and blamed because hee
was once seene to seeke for shelter under a house.  They were so
hardened to endure all manner of labour and toyle that it was counted
a reprochfull infamy for a souldier to be seene under any other roofe
than that of heavens vault, in what weather soever. {stoicism+} Were
we to doe so, we should never lead our

----- 1 ARIOSTO.  Orl.  Cant. xii. stan. 30.

men far.  Marcellinus, a man well trained in the Roman wars, doth
curiously observe the manner which the Parthians used to arme
themselves, and noteth it so much the more by how much it was far
different from the Romans.  They had (saith he) certaine armes so
curiously enter-wrought as they seemed to be made like feathers, which
nothing hindered the stirring of their, bodies and yet so strong, that
our darts hitting them did rather rebound, or glance by, than hurt
them (they be the scales our ancestors were so much wont to use).  In
another place they had (saith he) their horses stiffe and strong,
covered with thick hides, and themselves armed from head to foot with
massie iron plates so artificially contrived that where the joynts are
there they furthered the motion and helped the stirring.  A man would
have said they had been men made of yron, for they had peeces so
handsomly fitted, and so lively representing the forme and parts of
the face, that there was no way to wound them but at certaine little
holes before their eyes, which served to give them some light, and by
certaine chinkes about their nostrils by which they hardly drew
breath.

  Flexilis inductis animator lamina nembris,

  Horribilis visu, credas simulacra moveri

  Ferrea, cognatoque viros spirare metallo.

  Par vestitus equis, ferrata fronte minantur,

  Ferratosque movent securi vulneris armos/1

  The bending plate is hook't on limbes orespread,

  Fearefull to fight, steele images seem'd lead,

  And men to breathe in mettall with them bred,

  Like furniture for horse, with steeled head,

  They threat, and safe from wound,

  With barr'd limbs tread the ground.

 Loe-heere a description much resembling the equipage of a complete
 French-man-at-armes with all his bards.  Plutarke reporteth that
 Demetrius caused two armours to be made, each one weighing six score
 pounds: one for himselfe, the other for Alcinus, the chiefe man of
 war that was next to him: whereas all common armours weighed but
 three score.

---------- 1 GLAUD. in Ruf. l. ii. 358.

CHAPTER 2.X+ OF BOOKS

I MAKE no doubt but it shall often befall me to speake of things which
are better, and with more truth, handled by such as are their
crafts-masters. Here is simply an essay of my natural faculties, and
no whit of those that I have acquired.  And he that shall task me with
ignorance shall have no great victory at my hands; for hardly could I
give others reasons for my discourses that give none unto my selfe,
and am not well satisfied with them.  He that shall make search after
knowledge, let him seek it where it is: there is nothing I professe
lesse. {PlainDealer+} These are but my fantasies by which endevour not
to make things known, but my selfe. They may haply one day be knowne
unto me, or have bin at other times, according as fortune hath brought
me where they were declared or manifested.  But I remember them no
more.  And if I be a man of some reading, yet I am a man of no
remembering.  I conceive no certainty, except it bee to give notice
how farre the knowledge I have of it doth now reach.  Let no man busie
himselfe about the matters, but on the fashion I give them.  Let that
which I borrow be surveied, and then tell me whether I have made good
choice of ornaments to beautifie and set foorth the invention which
ever comes from mee.  For I make others to relate (not after mine owne
fantastie, but as it best falleth out) what I cannot so well expresse
either through unskill of language or want of judgement.  I number not
my borrowings, but I weigh them. {ancients+} And if I would have made
their number to prevail, I would have had twice as many.  They are
all, or almost all, of so famous and ancient names that me thinks they
sufficiently name themselves without mee.  If in reasons, comparisons,
and arguments, I transplant any into my soile, or confound them with
mine owne, I purposely conceale the author, thereby to bridle the
rashnesse of these hastie censures that are so headlong cast upon all
manner of compositions, namely young writings of men yet living; and
in vulgare that admit all the world to talke of them and which seemeth
to convince the conception and publike designs alike.  I will have
them to give Plutarch+ a bob upon mine own lips, and vex themselves in
wronging Seneca+ in mee.  My weaknesse must be hidden under such great
credits.  I will love him that shal trace or unfeather me; I meane
through clearenesse of judgement, and by the onely distinction of the
force and beautie of my discourses.  For my selfe, who for want of
memorie am ever to seeke how to trie and refine them by the knowledge
of their country, knowe perfectly, by measuring mine owne strength,
that my soyle is no way capable of some over-pretious flowers that
therein I find set, and that all the fruits of my increase could not
make it amends. This am I bound to answer for if I hinder my selfe, if
there be either vanitie or fault in my discourses that I perceive not
or am not able to discerne if they be showed me.  For many faults do
often escape our eyes; but the infirmitie of judgement consisteth in
not being able to perceive them when another discovereth them unto us.
Knnowledge and truth may be in us without judgement, and we may have
judgement without them yea, the acknowledgement of ignorance is one of
the best and surest testimonies of judgement that I can
finde. {Socrates+} {PlainDealer+} I have no other sergeant of band to
marshal] my rapsodies than fortune.  And looke how my humours or
conceits present themselves, so I shuffle them up.  Sometimes they
prease thicke and three fold, and other times they come out
languishing one by one.  I will have my naturall and ordinarie pace
seen as loose and shuffling as it is.  As I am so go I on plodding.
And besides, these are matters that a man may not be ignorant of, and
rashly and casually to speake of them.  I would wish to have a more
perfect understanding of things, but I will not purchase it so deare
as it cost.  My intention is to passe the remainder of my life quietly
and not laboriously, in rest and not in care.  There is nothing I will
trouble or vex myself about, no not for science it selfe, what esteeme
soever it be of.  I doe not search and tosse over books but for an
honester recreation to please, and pastime to delight my selfe: or if
I studie, I only endevour to find out the knowledge that teacheth or
handleth the knowledge of my selfe, and which may instruct me how to
die_well+ and how to live well.

  Has meus ad metas sudet oportet equus./1

  My horse must sweating runne,

  That this goale may be wonne.




If in reading I fortune to meet with any difficult plants, I fret not
 my selfe about them, but after I have given them a charge or two, I
 leave them as I found them.  Should I earnestly plod upon them, I
 should loose both time and my selfe, for I have a skipping wit.  What

 I see not at the first view, I shall lesse see it if I opinionate my
 selfe upon it.  I doe nothing without blithnesse; and an over
 obstinate continuation and plodding contention doth dazle, du], and
 wearie the same: my sight is thereby confounded and diminished.  I
 must theref

  ore withdraw it, and at fittes goe to it againe.  Even as to judge

  well of the lustre of scarlet we are taught to cast our eyes over
  it,

  in running over by divers glances, sodaine glimpses and reiterated

  reprisings.  If one booke seeme tedious unto me I take another,
  which

  I follow not with any earnestnesse, except it be at such houres as I
  am

  idle, or that I am weary with doing nothing. I am not greatly
  affected

  to new books, because ancient_Authors+ are, in my judgement, more
  full

  and pithy: nor am I much addicted to

----- PROPERT. 1. iv.  El. i. 7

0.

Greeke_books+, forasmuch as my understanding cannot well rid his worke
with a childish and apprentise intelligence.  Amongst moderne bookes
meerly pleasant, I esteeme Bocace+ his Decameron, Rabelais+, and the
kisses of John the second (if they may be placed under this title),
worth the paines-taking to reade them.  As for Amadis+ and such like
trash of writings, they had never the credit so much as to allure my
youth to delight in them.  This I will say more, either boldly or
rashly that this old and beavie-pased minde of mine will no more be
pleased with Aristotle+, or tickled with good Ovid+: his facility and
quaint inventions, which heretofore have so ravished me, they can now
a days scarcely entertaine me.  I speake my minde freely of all
things, yea, of such as peradventure exceed my sufficiencie, and that
no way I hold to be of my jurisdiction.  What my conceit is of them is
told also to manifest the proportion of my insight, and not the
measure of things.  If at any time I finde my selfe distasted of
Platoes Axiochus, as of a forceles worke, due regard had to such an
Author, my judgement doth nothing beleeve it selfe: It is not so
fond-hardy, or selfe-conceited, as it durst dare to oppose it selfe
against the authority of so many other famous ancient judgements,
which he reputeth his regents and masters, and with whom hee had
rather erre.  He chafeth with, and condemneth himselfe, either to rely
on the superficiall sense, being unable to pierce into the centre, or
to view the thing by some false lustre.  He is pleased only to warrant
himselfe from trouble and unrulinesse: As for weaknesses he
acknowledgeth and ingeniously avoweth the same.  He thinks to give a
just interpretation to the apparences which his conception presents
unto him, but they are shallow and imperfect.  Most of Aesopes+ fables
have divers senses, and severall interpretations: Those which
inlythologize them, chose some kiude of colour well sutirig with the
fable; but for the most part, it is no other than the firstand
superficiall glosse: There are others more quicke, more siniaowie,
more essentiall, and more internall, into which they could never
penetrate; and thus thinke I with them.  But to follow my course., I
have ever deemed that in Poesie, Virgil, Lucretius, Catullus, and
Horace, doe doubtles by far hold the first ratike: and especially @ir@
in his Georgiks, which I esteeme to be the most accomplished peece
of.worke of Poesie: In comparison of which one may easily discerne,
that there are some passages in the AEneidos to which the Author (had
he lived) would no doubt have given some review or correction: The
fifth booke whereof is (in my minde) the most absolutely perfect.  I
also love Lucan+, and willingly read him, not so much for his stile,
as for his owne worth and truth of his opinion and judgement.  As for
good Terence, I allow the quaintnesse and grace of his Latine tongue,
and judge him wonderfull conceited and apt, lively to represent the
motions and passions of the minde, and the condition of our manners:
our actions make me often remember him.  I can never reade him so
often but still I discover some new grace and beautie in him.  Those
that lived about Virgil's time, complained that some would compare
Lucretius unto him.  I am of opinion that verily it is an unequall
comparison; yet can I hardly assure my seffe in this opinion
whensoever I finde my selfe entangled in some notable passage of
Lucretius.  If they were moved at this comparison, what would they say
now of the fond, hardy and barbarous stupiditie of those which now
adayes compare Ariosto unto him?  Nay, what would Ariosto say of it
himselfe?

  O seclum insipiens et infacetum.

  O age that hath no wit,

  And small conceit in it.


I thinke our ancestors had also more reason to cry out against those
that blushed not to equall Plautus+ unto Terence+ (who makes more show
to be a Gentleman) than Lucretius+ unto Virgil+.  This one thing doth
greatly advantage the estimation and preferring of

----- 1 CATUL.  Epig. xl. 8.

Terence, that the father of the Roman eloquence, of men of his quality
doth so often make mention of him; and the censure which the chiefs
Judge of the Roman Poets giveth of his companion.  It hath often come
unto my minde, how such as in our dayes give themselves to composing
of comedies (as the Italians who are very happy in them) employ three
or foure arguments of Terence and Plautus to nake up one of theirs.
In one onely comedy they will huddle up five or six of Bocaces tales.
That which makes them so to charge themselves with matter, is the
distrust they have of their owne sufficiency, and that they are not
able to undergoe so heavie a burthen with their owne strength.  They
are forced to finde a body on which they may rely and leane
themselves: and wanting matter of their owne wherewith to please us,
they will have the story or tale to busie and ammuse us: where as in
my Authors it is cleane contrary: The elegancies, the perfections and
ornaments of his manner of speech, make us neglect and lose the
longing for his subject.  His quaintnesse and grace doe still retaine
us to him. He is every where pleasantly conceited,

  Liquidus puroque simillimus amni,/1

  So clearely-neate, so neately-cleare,

  As he a fine-pure River were,

and doth so replenish our minde with his graces that we forget those
of the fable.  The same consideration drawes me somewhat further.  I
perceive that good and ancient Poets have shunned the affectation and
enquest, not only of fantasticall, new fangled, Spagniolized and
Petrarchisticall elevations, but also of more sweet and sparing
inventions, which are the ornament of all the Poeticall workes of
succeeding ages.  Yet is there no competent Judge that findeth them
wanting in those Ancient ones, and that doth not much more admire that
smoothly equall neatnesse, continued sweetnesse, and flourishing
comelinesse of Catullus his

----- 1 HOR. 1. ii.  Epig. ii. 120.

Epigrams, than all the sharpe quips and witty girds wherewith Martiall
doth whet and embellish the conclusions of his.  It is the same reason
I spake of erewhile, as Martiall of himselfe.  Minus illi ingenio
laborandum fuit, in cuius locum materia successerat:/1 'He needed the
less worke with his wit, in place whereof matter came in supply.' The
former without being moved or pricked cause themselves to be beard
lowd enough: they have matter to laugh at every where, and need not
tickle themselves; where as these must have foraine helpe: according
as they have lesse spirit, they must have more body.  They leape on
horse- backe, because they are not sufficiently strong in their legs
to march on foot.  Even as in our dances, those base conditioned men
that keepe dancing schooles, because they are unfit to represent the
port and decencie of our nobilitie, endevour to get commendation by
dangerous lofty trickes, and other strange tumbler-like friskes and
motions.  And some Ladies make a better shew of their countenances in
those dances, wherein are divers changes, cuttings, turnings, and
agitations of the body, than in some dances of state and gravity,
where they need but simply to tread a naturall, measure, represent an
unaffected cariage, and their ordinary grace; And as I have also seene
some excellent Lourdans, or Clownes, attired in their ordinary
workyday clothes, and with a common homely countenance, affoord us all
the pleasure that may be had from their art: but prentises and
learners that are not of so high a forme, besmeare their faces, to
disguise themselves, and in motions counterfeit strange visages and
antickes, to enduce us to laughter.  This my conception is no where
better discerned than in the comparison betweene Virgils AEneidos and
Orlando Furioso.  The first is seene to soare aloft with full-spread
wings, and with so high and strong a pitch, ever following his point;
the other faintly to hover and flatter from tale to tale, and as it
were skipping from bough to bough, alwayes distrusting his owne wings,
except it be for some short ----- 1 MART.  Praef. 1. viii.

  flight, and for feare his strength and breath should faile him, to
  sit downe at every fields-end;

  Excursusque breves tentat./1

  Out-lopes sometimes he doth assay,

  But very short, and as he may.

Loe here then, concerning this kinde of subjects, what Authors please
me best: As for my other lesson, which somewhat more mixeth profit
with pleasure, whereby I learne to range my opinions and addresse my
conditions, the Bookes that serve me thereinto are Plutarke+ (since be
spake French) and Seneca+, both have this excellent commodity for my
humour, that the knowledge I seeke in them is there so scatteringly
and loosely handled, that whosoever readeth them is not tied to plod
long upon them, whereof I am uncapable. And so are Plutarkes little
workes and Senecas Epistles, which are the best and most profitable
parts of their writings.  It is no great matter to draw mee to them,
and I leave them where I list.  For they succeed not and depend not
one of another.  Both jumpe and suit together, in most true and
profitable opinions: And fortune brought them both into the world in
one age.  Both were Tutors unto two Roman Emperours: Both were
strangers, and came from farre Countries; both rich and mighty in the
common-wealth, and in credit with their masters.  Their instruction is
the prime and creame of Philosophy, and presented with a plaine,
unaffected, and pertinent fashion. Plutarke is more uniforme and
constant; Seneca more waving and diverse. This doth labour, force, and
extend himselfe, to arme and strengthen vertue against weaknesse
feare, and vitious desires; the other seemeth nothing so much to feare
their force or attempt, and in a manner scorneth to hasten or change
his pace about them, and to put himselfe upon his guard.  Plutarkes
opinions are Platonicall, gentle and accommodable unto civill
societie: Senecaes Stoicall and Epicurian, further from

----- 1 VIRG.  AEn. 1. iv. 194.

common use, but in my conceit more proper particular, and more
solid. It appeareth in Seneca that he somewhat inclineth and yeeldeth
to the tyrannie of the Emperors which were in his daies; for I verily
believe, it is with a forced judgement he condemneth the cause of
those noblie-minded murtherers of Caesar; {Brutus+} Plutarke is every
where free and open hearted; Seneca fullfraught with points and
sallies; Plutarke stuft with matters.  The former doth move and
enflame you more; the latter content, please, and pay you better: This
doth guide you, the other drive you on!  As for Cicero, of all his
works, those that treat of Philosophie (namely morall) are they which
best serve my turne, and square with my intent.  But boldly to confess
the truth (for, since the bars of impudencie were broken downe, all
curbing is taken away), his manner of writing seemeth verie tedious
unto me, as doth all such like stuffe.  For his prefaces, definitions,
divisions, and Etymologies consume the greatest part of his works;
whatsoever quick, wittie, and pithie conceit is in him is surcharged
and confounded by those his long and far-fetcht preambles.  If I
bestow but one hour in reading them, which is much for me, and let me
call to minde what substance or juice I have drawne from him, for the
most part I find nothing but wind and ostentation in him; for he is
not yet come to the arguments which make for his purpose, and reasons
that concerne the knot or pith I seek after.  These Logicall and
Aristotelian ordinances are not availfull for me who onely endeavour
to become more wise and sufficient and not more wittie or eloquent.  I
would have one begin with the last point; I understand sufficiently
what death and voluptuousuesse are: let not a man busie himselfe to
anatomize them. At the first reading of a booke I seeke for good and
solid reasons that may instruct me how to sustaine their assaults.  It
is neither grammaticall subtilties or logicall quiddities, nor the
wittie contexture of choice words or arguments and syllogismes, that
will serve my turne. {PlainDealer+} I like those discourses that give
the first charge to the strongest part of the doubt; his are but
flourishes, and languish everywhere.  They are good for schooles, at
the barre, or for Orators and Preachers, where we may slumber: and
though we wake a quarter of an houre after, we may finde and trace him
soone enough. Such a manner of speech is fit for those judges that a
man would corrupt by hooke or crooke, by right or wrong, or for
children and the common people, unto whom a man must tell all, and see
what the event would be.  I would not have a man go about and labour
by circumlocutions to induce and winne me to attention, and that (as
our Heralds or Criers do) they shall ring out their words: Now heare
me, now listen, or ho-yes.  The Romanes in their religion were went to
say, 'Hoc age;' which in ours we say, 'Sursum corda. There are so many
lost words for me.  I come readie prepared from my house. I neede no
allurement nor sawce, my stomacke is good enough to digest raw meat:
And whereas with these preparatives and flourishes, or preambles, they
thinke to sharpen my taste or stir my stomacke, they cloy and make it
wallowish.  Shall the privilege of times excuse me from this
sacrilegious boldnesse, to deeme Platoes Dialogismes to be as
languishing, by overfilling and stuffing his matter?  And to bewaile
the time that a man who had so many thousands of things to utter,
spends about so many, so long, so vaine, and idle interlocutions, and
preparatives?  My ignorance shall better - excus me, in that I see
nothing in the beautie of his language.  I generally enquire after
bookes that use sciences, and not after such as institute them.  The
two first, and Plinie, with others of their ranke, have no Hoc age in
them, they will have to doe with men that have forewarned themselves;
or if they have, it is a materiall and substantiall Hoc age, and that
hath his bodie apart.  I likewise love to read the Epistles and ad
Atticum, not onely because they contains a most ample instruction of
the historic and affaires of his times, but much more because in them
I descrie his private humours.  For (as I have said elsewhere) I am
wonderfull curious to discover and know the minde, the soul the
genuine disposition and naturall judgement of my authors.  A man ought
to judge their sufficiencie and not their customes, nor them by the
show of their writings, which they set forth on this world's theatre.
I have sorrowed a thousand times that ever we lost the booke that
Brutus+ writ of Vertue. Oh it is a goodly thing to learne the Theorike
of such as understand the practice well.  But forsomuch as the Sermon
is one thing and the Preacher an other, I love as much to see Brutus
in Plutarke+ as in himself: I would rather make choice to know
certainly what talk he had in his tent with some of his familiar
friends, the night fore-going the battell, than the speech he made the
morrow after to his Armie and what he did in his chamber or closet,
than what in the senate or market place.  As for Cicero+, I am of the
common judgement, that besides learning there was no exquisite
eloquence in him: He was a good citizen, of an honest, gentle nature,
as are commonly fat and burly men: for so was he: But to speake truly
of him, full of ambitious vanity and remisse niceness.  And I know not
well how to excuse him, in that be deemed his Poesie worthy to be
published.  It is no great imperfection to make bad verses, but it is
an imperfection in him that he never perceived how unworthy they were
of the glorie of his name.  Concerning his eloquence, it is beyond all
comparison, and I verily beleeve that none shall ever equall it.
Cicero the younger, who resembled his father in nothing but in name,
commanding in Asia, chanced one day to have many strangers at his
board, and amongst others, one Caestius sitting at the lower end, as
the manner is to thrust in at great mens tables: Cicero inquired of
one of his men what he was, who told him his name, but he dreaming on
other matters, and having forgotten what answere his man made him,
asked him his name twice or thrice more: the servant, because he would
not be troubled to tell him one thing so often, and by some
circumstance to make him to know him better, 'It is,' said he, 'the
same Caestius of whom some have told you that, in respect of his owne,
maketh no accompt of your fathers eloquence:' Cicero being suddainly
mooved, commanded the said Caestius to be presently taken from the
table, and well whipped in his presence: Lo heere an uncivill and
barbarous host.  Even amongst those which (all things considered) have
deemed his eloquence matchlesse and incomparable, others there have
been who have not spared to note some faults in it.  As great Brutus+
said, that it was an eloquence broken, halting, and disjoynted,
fractam et elumbem. 'Incoherent and sinnnowlesse.  Those Orators that
lived about his age, reproved also in him the curious care he had of a
certaine long cadence at the end of his clauses, and noted these
words, esse videatur, which he so often useth.  As for me, I rather
like a cadence that falleth shorter, cut like Iambikes: yet doth he
sometimes confounde his numbers, but it is seldome: I have especially
observed this one place; Ego vero me minus diu senem esse mallem, quam
esse senem, antequam

  essem:/1 'But I had ather not be an old man, so long as I might be,

  than to be old before I should be.'  Historians are my right hand,

  for they are pleasant and easie; and therewithall the man with whom
  I

  desire generally to be acquainted may more lively and perfectly be


  discovered in them than in any other composition: the varietie and

  truth of his inward conditions, in grosse and by retale: the

  diversitie of the meanes of his collection and composing, and of the

  accidents that threaten him.  Now those that write of mens lives,
  forasmuch as they

  ammuse and busie themselves more about counsels than events, more

  about that which commeth from within than that which appeareth

  outward; they are fittest for me: And that's the reason why Plutarke

  above all in that kind doth best please me.  Indeed I am not a
  little grieved that
  
  we have not a dozen of Laertius, or that be is not more knowne, or

  better understood; for I am no lesse curious to know the fortunes
  and

  lives of these great masters of the world than to understand the

  diversitie of their decrees and conceits.  In this kind of studie of
  historie a man must, without distinction, tosse and -

---- CIC.  De Senect.

turne over all sorts of Authors, both old and new, both French and
others, if he will learne the things they so diversly treat of.  But
me thinkes that Caesar+ above all doth singularly deserve to be
studied, not onely for the understanding of the historie as of
himselfe; so much perfection and excellencie is there in him more than
in others, although Salust be reckoned one of the number.  Verily I
read that author with a little more reverence and respects than
commonly men reade profane and humane Workes: sometimes considering
him by his actions and wonders of his greatnesse, and other times
waighing the puritie and inimitable polishing and elegancie of his
tongue, which (as Cicero saith) hath not onely exceeded all
historians, but haply Cicero+ himselfe: with such sinceritie in his
judgement, speaking of his enemies, that except the false colours
wherewith he goeth about to cloakebis bad cause, and the corruption
and filthinesse of his pestilent ambition, I am perswaded there is
nothing in him to be found fault with: and that he hath been
over-sparing to speake of himselfe; for so many notable and great
things could never be executed by him, unlesse he bad put more of his
owne into them than be setteth downe.  I love those Historians that
a-re either very simple or most excellent.  The simple who have
nothing of their owne to adde unto the storie and have but the care
and diligence to collect whatsoever come to their knowledge, and
sincerely and faithfully to register all things, without choice or
culling, by the naked truth leave our judgment more entire and better
satisfied.  Such amongst others (for examples sake) plaine and
well-meaning Froissard+, who in his enterprise hath marched with so
free and genuine a puritie, that having committed some oversight, he
is neither ashamed to acknowledge nor afraid to correct the same,
wheresoever h hath either notice or warning of it: and who
representeth unto us the diversitie of the newes then current and the
diferent reports that were made unto him.  The subject of an historie
should be naked, bare, and formelesse; each man according to his
capacitie or understanding may reap commoditie out of it.  The curious
and most excellent have the sufficiencie to cull and chuse that which
is worthie to be knowne and may select of two relations that which is
most likely: from the condition of Princes and of their humours, they
conclude their counsels and attribute fit words to them: they assume a
just authoritie and bind our faith to theirs.  But truly that belongs
not to many.  Such as are betweene both (which is the most common
fashion), it is they that spoil all; they will needs chew our meat for
us and take upon them a law to judge, and by consequence to square and
encline the storie according to their fantasie; for, where the
judgement bendeth one way, a man cannot chose but wrest and turne his
narration that way.  They undertake to chuse things worthy to bee
knowne, and now and then conceal either a word or a secret action from
us, which would much better instruct us: omitting such things as they
understand not as incredible: and haply such matters as they know not
how to declare either in good Latin or tolerable French.  Let them
boldly enstall their eloquence and discourse: Let them censure at
their pleasure, but let them also give us leave to judge after them:
And let them neither alter nor dispense by their abridgements and
choice anything belonging to the substance of the matter; but let them
rather send it pure and entire with all her dimensions unto us.  Most
commonly (as chiefly in our age) this charge of writing histories is
committed unto base, ignorant, and mechanicall kind of people, only
for this consideration that they can speake well; as if we sought to
learne the Grammer of them; and they have some reason, being only
hired to that end, and publishing nothing but their tittle-tattle to
aime at nothing else so much.  Thus with store of choice and quaint
words, and wyre drawne phrases, they huddle up and make a hodge-pot of
a laboured contexture of the reports which they gather in the market
places or such other assemblies.  The only good histories are those
that are written by such as commanded or were imploied themselves in
weighty affaires or that were partners in the conduct of them, or that
at least have had the fortune to manage others of like qualitie.  Such
in a manner are all the Graecians and Romans.  For many eyewitness
having written of one same subject it hapned in those times when
Greatnesse and Knowledge did commonly meet) if any fault or oversight
have past them, it must be deemed exceeding light and upon some
doubtfull accident.  What may a man expect at a Phisitians hand that
discourseth of warre, or of a bare Scholler treating of Princes secret
designes?  If we shall but note the religion which the Romans had in
that, wee need no other example: Asinus Pollio found some mistaking or
or oversight in Caesars Commentaries, whereinto he was faine, only
because he could not possiblie oversee all things with his owne eyes
that hapned in his Armie, but was faine to rely on the reports of
particular men, who often related untruths unto him; or else because
he had not been curiously advertised and distinctly enformed by his
Lieutenants and Captaines of such matters as they in his absence had
managed or affected.  Whereby may be seen that nothing is so hard or
so uncertaine to be found out as the certaintie of the truth, sithence
no man can put any assured confidence concerning the truth of a
battel, neither in the knowledge of him that was Generall or commanded
over it, nor in the soldiers that fought, of anything that hath hapned
amongst them; except after the manner of a strict point of law, the
severall witnesses are brought and examined face to face, and that all
matters be nicely and thorowly sifted by the objects and trials of the
successe of every accident. Verily the knowledge we have of our owne
affaires is much more barren and feeble.  But this hath sufficiently
been handled by Bodin, and agreeing with my conception.  Somewhat to
aid the weaknesse of my memorie and to assist her great defects; for
it hath often been my chance to light upon bookes which I supposed to
be new and never to have read, which I had not understanding
diligently read and ran over many years before, and all bescribled
with my notes: I have a while since accustomed my selfe to note at the
end of my booke (I meane such as I purpose to read but once) the time
I made an end to read it, and to set downe what censure or judgement I
gave of it; that so it may at least at another time represent unto my
mind the aire and generall idea I bad conceived of the author in
reading him.  I will here set downe the Copie of some of my
annotations, and especially what I noted upon my Guicciardine about
ten yeares since (For what language soever my books speake unto me I
speake unto them in mine owne.) He is a diligent Historiographer and
from whom in my conceit a man may as exactly learne the truth of such
affaires as passed in his time, as of any other writer whatsoever and
the rather because himselfe hath been an Actor of most part of them
and in verie honourable place.  There is no signe or apparance that
ever be disguised or coloured any matter, either through hatred,
malice, favour, or vanitie; whereof the free and impartiall judgements
he giveth of great men, and namely of those by whom he had been
advanced or imployed in his important charges, as of Pope Clement the
seaventh, beareth undoubted testimony.  Concerning the parts wherein
be most goeth about to prevaile, which are his digressions and
discourses, many of them are verie excellent and enriched with faire
ornaments, but he hath too much pleased himselfe in them: for
endeavouring to omit nothing that might be spoken, having so full and
large a subject, and almost infinite, he proveth somewhat languishing,
and giveth a taste of a kind of scholasticall tedious babling.
Moreover, I have noted this, that of so severall and divers armes,
successes, and effects he judgeth of; of so many and variable motives,
alterations, and counsels, that be relateth, he never referreth any
one unto vertue, religion, or conscience as if they were all
extinguished and banished the world: {morality_of_history+} and of all
actions how glorious soever in apparance they be of themselves, he
doth ever impute the cause of them to some vicious and blame-worthie
occasion, or to some commoditie and profit.  It is impossible to
imagine that amongst so infinite a number of actions whereof he
judgeth, some one have not been produced and compassed by way of
reason.  No corruption could ever possesse men so universally but that
some one must of necessity escape the contagion; which makes me to
feare he hath had some distaste or blame in his passion, and it hath
haply fortuned that he hath judged or esteemed of others according to
himselfe.  In my Philip de Comines there is this: In him you shall
find a pleasing-sweet and gently-gliding speech, fraught with a purely
sincere simplicitie, his narration pure and unaffected, and wherein
the Authours unspotted good meaning doth evidently appeare, void of
all manner of vanitie or ostentation speaking of himselfe, and free
from all afection or envie-speaking of others; his discourses and
perswasions accompanied more with a well-meaning zeale and meere
veritie than with any laboured and exquisite sufficiencie, and
allthrough with gravitie and authoritie, representing a man well-borne
and brought up in high negotiations. Upon the menioires and historie
of Monsieur du Bellay.  It is ever a well-pleasing thing to see
matters written by those that have assaid how and in what manner they
ought to be directed and managed: yet can it not be denied but that in
both these Lords there will manifestly appeare a great declination
from a free libertie of writing, which clearely shineth in ancient
writers of their kind: as in the Lord of Iouinille, familiar unto
Saint Lewis; Eginard, Chancellor unto Charlemaine; and of more fresh
memorie in Philip de Comines.  This is rather a declamation or
pleading for king Francis against the Emperour Charles the fifth, than
an Historie.  I will not beleeve they have altered or changed any
thing concerning the generalitie of matters, but rather to wrest and
turne the judgement of the events many times against reason, to our
advantage, and to omit whatsoever they supposed to be doubtful or
ticklish in their masters life: they have made a business of it:
witnesse the recoylings of the Lords of Momorancy and Byron, which
therein are forgotten; and which is more, you shall not so much as
find the name of the Ladie of Estampes mentioned at all.  A man may
sometimes colour and haply hide secret actions, but absolutely to
conceal that which all the world knoweth, and especially such things
as have drawne-on publike effects, and of such consequence, it is an
inexcusable defect, or as I may say unpardonable oversight.  To
conclude, whosoever desireth to have perfect information and knowledge
of king Francis the first, and of the things hapned in his time, let
him addresse himselfe elsewhere if he will give any credit unto me.
The profit he may reap here is by the particular description of the
battels and exploits of warre wherein these gentlemen were present;
some privie conferences, speeches, or secret actions of some princes
that then lived, and the practices managed, or negotiations directed
by the Lord of Langeay, in which doubtless are verie many things well
worthy to be knowne, and diverse discourses not vulgare.

CHAPTER 2.XI+ OF CRUELTIE


METHINKS Virtue+ is another manner of thing, and much more noble than
the inclinations unto Goodnesse, which in us are engendered.  Mindes
wellborne, and directed by themselves, follow one same path, and in
their actions represent the same visage that the vertuous doe.  But
Vertue importeth and soundeth somewhat I wot not what greater and more
active than by an happy complexion, gently and peaceably, to suffer
itself to be led or drawne to follow reason.  He that through a
naturall facilitie and genuine mildnesse should neglect or contemne
injuries received, should no doubt performe a rare action, and worthy
commendation: but he who being toucht and stung lo the quicke with any
wrong or offence received, should arme himselfe with reason against
this furiously blind desire of revenge, and in the end after a great
conflict yeeld himselfe master over it, should doubtlesse doe much
more.  The first should doe well, the other vertuously: the one action
might be termed Goodnesse, the other Vertue.  For it seemeth that the
very name of Vertue presupposeth difficulties and inferreth
resistance, and cannot well exercise itselfe without an eneniie.  It
is peradventure the reason why we call God good, mightie, liberall,
and just, but we term him not vertuous.  His workes are all
voluntarie, unforced, and without compulsion.  Of Philosophers, not
only Stoicks, but also Epicureans (which phrasing I borrow of the
common received opinion, which is false, whatsoever the nimble saying
or wittie quipping of Arcesilaus implied, who answered the man that
upbraided him, how divers men went from his schoole to the Epicureans,
but none came from thence to him: I easily beleeve it (said he) for of
cocks are many capons made, but no man could ever make a cock of a
capon.  For truly in constancie opinion and strictnesse of precepts,
the Epicurean_sect+ doth in no sort yeeld to the Stoicke+.  And a
Stoike acknowledging a better faith than those disputers who, to
contend with Epicurus and make sport with him, make him to infer and
say what he never meant, wresting and wyre-drawing his words to a
contrarie sense, arguing and silogizing, by the grammarians privilege,
another meaning, by the manner of his speech and another opinion than
that they knew he had either in his minde or manners, saith that he
left to be an Epicurean for this one consideration amongst others,
that he findeth their pitch to be over high and inaccessible: Et ii
qui otzOovot vocantur, sunt pt

  JwaXOL et OiXo8imatot omnesque virtutes et colunt et retinent:/1

'And those that are called lovers of pleasures, are lovers of honestie
and justice, and doe reverence and retaine all sorts of vertue.  Of
Stoicke and Epicurean Philosophers, I say, there are divers who have
judged that it was not sufficient to have the minde well placed, well
ordered, and well disposed unto vertue; it was not enough to have our
resolutions and discourse beyond all the affronts and checks of
fortune; but that, moreover, it was verie requisite to seeke for
occasions whereby a man might come to the triall of it.  They will
diligently quest and seeke out for paine, smart, necessitie, want, and
contempt, that so they may combat them, and keepe their minde in
breath: Multum sibi adjicit virtus lacessita: 'Vertue provoked addes
much to it selfe.  It is one of the reasons why Epaminondas (who was
of a third sect) by a verie lawfull way refuseth some riches fortune
had put into his hands, to the end (as he saith) he might have cause
to strive and resist povertie, in which want and extremitie he ever
continued after.  Socrates+ did in my minde more undauntedly enure
himselfe to this humor, maintaining for his exercise

----- 1 SEN.  Epist. xiii.

the peevish frowardnesse of his wife, than which no essay can be more
vexfull, and is a continuall fighting at the sharpe.  Metellus of all
the Roman senators he onely having undertaken with the power of
vertue, to endure the violence of Saturninus Tribune of the people in
Rome, who by maine force went about to have a most unjust law passe in
favour of the Communaltie: by which opposition, having incurred all
the capital paines that Saturninus had imposed on such as should
refuse it, entertained those that led him to the place of execution,
with such speeches: That to doe evill was a thing verie easie, and too
demissely base, and to doe well where was no danger, was a common
thing, but to doe well where was both perill and opposition, was the
peculiar office of a man of vertue. {Kent+} These words of Metellus
doe clearly represent unto us what I would have verified ; which is,
that vertue rejecteth facilitie to be her companion: And that an
easefull, pleasant, and declining way by which the regular steps of a
good inclination of nature are directed is not the way of true vertue.
She requireth a craggie, rough, and thornie way. {Donne+} She would
either have strange difficulties to wrestle withall (as that of
Metellus) by whose meanes fortune her selfe is pleased to breake the
roughnesse of his course; or such inward incombrances as the
disordinate appetites and imperfections of our condition bring unto
her.  Hitherto I have come at good ease; but at the end of this
discourse one thing commeth into my minde, which is that the soule of
Socrates+, which is absolute the perfectest that ever came to my
knowledge, would, according to my accompt, prove a soule deserving but
little commendation: For I can conceive no manner of violence or
vicious concupiscence in him: I can imagine no manner of difficultie
or compulsion in the whole course of his vertue.  I know his reason so
powerfull, and so absolute mistress over him, that she can never give
him way in any vicious desire, and will not suffer it so much as to
breed in him.  To a vertue so exquisite and so high raised as his is,
I can perswade nothing. Me thinks I see it march with a victorious and
triumphant pace, in pompe and at ease, without let or disturbance. If
vertue cannot shine but by resisting contrarie appetites, shall we
then say it cannot passe without the assistance of vice, and oweth him
this, that by his meanes it attaineth to honour and credit?  What
should also betide of that glorious and generous Epicurean
voluptuousnesse that makes accompt effeminately to pamper vertue in
her lap, and there wantonly to entertains it, allowing it for her
recreation, shame, reproch, agues, povertie, death, and tortures? if I
presuppose that perfect vertue is knowne by combating sorrow and
patiently undergoing paine, by tolerating the fits and agonies of the
gout, without stirring out of his place; if for a necessarie object I
appoint her sharpnesse and difficultie, what shall become of that
vertue which hath attained so high a degree, as it doth not only
despise all manner of paine, but rather rejoyceth at it, and when a
strong fit of the collike shall assaile it, to cause it selfe to be
tickled, as that is which the Epicureans have established, and whereof
divers amongst them have by their actions left most certaine proofes
unto us?  As also others have, whom ill effect finde to have exceeded
the verie rules of their discipline; witnesseCato+ the younger; when I
see him die, tearing and mangling his entrails, I cannot simply
content my selfe to beleeve that at that time he had his soule wholly
exempted from all trouble or free from vexation: I cannot imagine be
did only maintaine himselfe in this march or course which the rule of
the Stoike sect had ordained unto him, setled, without alteration or
emotion, and impassible.  There was, in my conceit, in this mans
vertue overmuch cheerefulnesse and youthfulnesse to stay there.  I
verily beleeve he felt a kind of pleasure and sensualitie in so noble
an action, and that therein he more pleased himself than in any other
be ever performed in his life.  Sic abiit e vita, ut causam moriendi
nactum se esse gauderet:/1 'So departed be his life, that he rejoiced
to have found an occasion of death.' I doe so constantly beleeve it,

----- 1 CIC.  Tusc.  Qu. 1. i.

that I make a doubt whether be would have had the occasion of so noble
an exploit taken from him.  And if the goodnesse which induced him to
embrace publike commodities more than his owne did not bridle me, I
should easily fall into this opinion, that he thought himselfe greatly
beholding unto fortune to have put his vertue unto so noble a triall,
and to have favoured that robber to tread the ancient libertie of his
countrie under foot.  In which action me thinks I read a kinde of
unspeakable joy in his minde, and a motion of extraordinary pleasure,
joined to a manlike voluptuonsnesse, at what time it beheld the
worthinesse, and considered the generositie and haughtinesse of his
enterprise,

  Deliberata morte ferocior/1

  Then most in fiercenesse did he passe,

  When he of death resolved was,

not urged or set-on by any hope of glorie, as the popular and
effeminate judgements have judged: For, that consideration is over
base, to touch so generous, so haughtie, and so constant+ a heart; but
for the beautie of the thing it selfe, which he, who managed all the
springs and directed all the wards thereof, saw much more clearer, and
in its perfection, than we can doe.  Philosophie hath done me a
pleasure to judge that so honorable an action had been undecently
placed in any other life than in Catoes, and that onely unto his it
appertained to make such an end.  Therefore did he with reason
perswade both his sonne and the Senators that accompanied him, to
provide otherwise for themselves.  Catoni quum incredibilem natura
tribuisset gravitatem, eamque ipse perpetua constantia roboravisset,
semperque in proposito consilio permansisset: mortendum potius quam
tyranni vultus aspiciendus erat: 'Whereas nature had affoorded Cato an
incredible gravitie, and he had strengthened it by continuall
constancie, and ever had stood firme in his proposed desseignes,
rather to die than behold the Tyrants face.  Each

----- 1 HOR. 1. i.  Od. xxvii. xxix.  Cleopatra.

death+ should be such as the life hath been.  By dying we become no
other than we were.  I ever interpret a mans death by his life.  And
if a man shall tell me of any one undanted in apparance, joyned unto a
weake life; I imagine it to proceed of some weake cause, and sutable
to his life.  The ease therefore of his death, and the facilitie he
had acquired by the vigor of his minde, shall we say, it ought to
abate something of the lustre of his vertue? And which of those that
have their spirits touched, be it never so little, with the true
tincture of Philosophie, can content himselfe to imagine Socrates,
onely, free from feare and passion, in the accident of his
imprisonment, of his fetters, and of his condemnation?  And who doth
not perceive in him, not onely constancie+ and resolution (which were
ever his ordinarie qualities) but also a kinde of I wot not what new
contentment, and carelesse rejoycing in his last behaviour, and
discourses?  By the startling at the pleasure, which he feeleth in
clawing of his legges, after his fetters were taken-off; doth he not
manifestly declare an equal glee and joy in his soule for being rid of
his former incommodities, and entering into the knowledge of things to
come?  Cato shall pardon me (if he please) his death is more
tragicall, and further extended, whereas this in a certaine manner is
more faire and glorious.  Aristippus answered those that bewailed the
same, 'When I die, I pray the Gods send me such a death.  A man shall
plainly perceive in the minds of these two men, and of such as imitate
them (for I make a question whether ever they could be matched) so
perfect an habitude unto vertue, that it was even converted into their
complexion.  It is no longer a painefull vertue, nor by the ordinances
of reason, for the maintaining of which their minde must be
strengthened: It is the verie essence of their soule; it is her
naturall and ordinarie habit.  They have made it such, by a long
exercise and observing the rules and precepts of Philosophic, having
lighted upon a faire and rich nature.  Those vicious passions which
breed in us finde no entrance in them.  The vigor and con- stancie of
their soules, doth suppresse and extinguish all manner of
concupiscences so soone as they but begin to move.  Now that it be not
more glorious, by an undaunted and divine resolution, to hinder the
growth of temptations, and for a man to frame himselfe to vertue, so
that the verie seeds of vice be cleane rooted out; than by mayne force
to hinder their progresse; and having suffred himselfe to be surprised
by the first assaults of passions, to arme and bandie himselfe, to
stay their course and to suppresse them: And that this second effect
be not also much fairer than to be simply stored with a facile and
gentle nature, and of it selfe distasted and in dislike with
licentiousnesse and vice, I am perswaded there is no doubt. For this
third and last manner seemeth in some sort to make a man innocent, but
not vertuous: free from doing ill, but not sufficiently apt to doe
well.  Seeing this condition is so neere unto imperfection and
weaknesses that I know not well how to cleare their confines and
distinctions.  The verie names of goodnesse and innocencie, are for
this respect in some sort names of contempt.  I see that many vertues,
as chastitie, sobrietie, and temperance, may come unto us by meanes of
corporall defects and imbecilities. Constancie in dangers (if it may
be termed constancie) contempt of death, patiencie in misfortunes, may
happen and are often seen in men, for want of good judgeent in such
accidents, and that they are not apprehended for such as they are
indeed.  Lacke of apprehension and stupiditie counterfeit vertuous
effects.  As I have often seen come to passe, that some men arc
commended for things they rather deserve to be blamed.  An Italian
gentleman did once hold this position in my presence, to the prejudice
and disadvantage of his nation; That the subtiltie of the Italians,
and the vivacitie of their conceptions was so great that they foresaw
such dangers and accidents as might betide them so far-off that it was
not to be deemed strange if in times of warre they were often seene to
provide for their safetie, yea, before they had perceived the danger:
That we and the Spaniards, who were not so warie and subtill, went
further; and that before we could be frighted with any perill, we must
be induced to see it with our eyes, and feel it with our hands, and
that even then we had no more hold: But that the Germanes and
Switzers, more shallow and leaden-headed, had scarce the sense and wit
to re-advise themselves, at what times they were even overwhelmed with
miserie, and the axe readie to fall on their heads.  It was
peradventure but in jest that be spake-it, yet is it most true that in
the art of warre-fare new trained souldlers, and such as are but
novices in the trade, doe often headlong and hand over head cast
themselves into dangers, with more inconsideration than afterward when
they have seene and endured the first shocks, and are better trained
in the schoole of perils.

  ----- haud iqnarus, quantum nova gloria in armis,

  Et praedulce decus primo certamine possit.


  Not ignorant, how much in armes new praise,

  And sweetest honour, in first conflict weighes.

Lo here the reason why when we judge of a particular action, we must
first consider many circumstances, and throughly observe the man, that
hath produced the same before we name and censure it.  But to speake a
word of my selfe: I have sometimes noted my friends to terme that
wisdome in me which was but meere fortune, and to deeme that advantage
of courage and patience that was advantage of judgement and opinion;
and to attribute one title for another unto me, sometimes to my
profit, and now and then to my losse.  As for the rest, I am far from
attaining unto that chiefe and most perfect degree of excellences,
where a habitude is made of vertue, that even of the second I have
made no great triall.  I have not greatly strived to bridle the
desires wherewith I have found my selfe urged and pressed.  My vertue
is a vertue, or to say better innocencie, accidentall and casuall.
Had I been borne with a lesse regular complexion, I imagine my state
had been verie pittifull, and it would have gon hard with me: for, I
could never perceive any great constancie in my soule, to resist and
undergoe passions, had they been any thing violent. I cannot foster
quarels, or endure contentions in my house.  So am I not greatly
beholding unto my selfe, in that I am exempted from many vices:

  ----- si vitiis mediocribus, et mea paucis

  Mendosa est natura, alioqui recta, velut si


  Egregio inspersos reprehendas corpore naevos./1

  If in a few more faults my nature faile,

  Right otherwise: as if that you would raile

  On prettie moles well placed,

  On bodie seemely graced:

I am more endebted to my fortune+ than to my reason for it: Shee hath
made me to be borne of a race famous for integritie and honestie, and
of a verie good father.  I wot not well whether any part of his
humours have descended into me, or whether the domestike examples and
good institution of my infancie have insensibly set their helping hand
unto it; or whether I were otherwise so borne:

  Seu Libra, seu me Scorpius aspicit

  Formidolosus, pars violentior

  Natalis horae, seu tyrannus

  Hesperiae Capricornus undae/2

  Whether the chiefe part of my birth-houre were

  Ascendent Libra, or Scorpius full of feare,

  Or in my Horoseope were Capricorne,

  Whose tyrannie neere westerne seas is borne:

But so it is, that naturally of my selfe I abhorre and detest all
manner of vices.  The answer of Antisthenes to one that demanded of
him which was the best thing to be learned; To unlearne evill, seemed
to be fixed on this image, or to have an ayme at thi.  I abhorre them
(I say) with so naturall and so innated an opinion, that the very same
instinct and impression which I suckt from my nurse, I have so kept
that no occasions

----- 1 HOR. 1. viii.  Sat. vi. 65. 2 Ibid. 1. ii, Od. xvii. 17,

could ever make me alter the same: no, not mine owne discourses,
which, because they have been somewhat lavish in noting or taxing
something of the common course, could easily induce me to some actions
which this my naturall inclination makes me to hate.  I will tell you
a wonder, I will tell it you indeed: I thereby find in many things
more stay and order in my manners than in my opinion: and my
concupiscence lesse debauched than my reason.  Aristippus established
certaine opinions so bold, in favour of voluptuousnesse and riches,
that he made all Philosophie to mutinie against him.  But concerning
his manners, Dionysius the tyrant, having presented him with three
faire young wenches, that he might chuse the fairest, he answered he
would chuse them all three, and that Paris had verie ill successes
forsomuch as be had preferred one above her fellowes.  But they being
brought to his owne house, he sent them backe againe, without tasting
them.  His servant one day carrying store of money after him, and
being so overcharged with the weight of it that he complained, his
master commanded him to cast so much thereof away as troubled him.
And Epicurus, whose positions are irreligious and delicate, demeaned
himselfe in his life very laboriously and devoutly.  He wrote to a
friend of his, that he lived but with browne bread and water, and
entreated him to send him a piece of cheese, against the time he was
to make a solemne feast.  May it be true, that to be perfectly good we
must be so by an hidden, naturall, and universall proprietie, without
law, reason, and example?  The disorders and excesses wherein I have
found my selfe engaged are not (God be thanked) of the worst.  I have
rejected and condemned them in my selfe, according to their worth; for
my judgement was never found to be infected by them.  And on the other
side, I accuse them more rigorously in my selfe than in another.  But
that is all: as for the rest, I applie but little resistance unto
them, and suffer my selfe over-easily to encline to the other side of
the ballance, except it be to order and empeach them from being
commixt with others, which (if a man take not good heed unto himselfe)
for the most part entertaine and enterchaine themselves the one with
the other.  As for mine, I have, as much as it hath laine in my power,
abridged them, and kept them as single and as alone as I could:

  -----nec ultra,

  Errorem foveo/1


  Nor doe I cherish any more,

  The error which I bred before.


For, as touching the Stoikes opinion, who say, that when the wise man
worketh, he worketh with all his vertues together; howbeit, according
to the nature of the action, there be one more apparent than other (to
which purpose the similitude of mans bodie might, in some sort, serve
their turne; for the action of choler cannot exercise it selfe, except
all the humours set-to their helping hand, although choler be
predominant) if thence they will draw a like consequence, that when
the offender trespasseth, he doth it with all the vices together, I
doe not so easily beleeve them, or else I understand them not: for, in
effect, I feel the contrarie.  They are sharpe-wittie subtilties, and
without substance, about which Philosophie doth often busie it selfe.
Some vices I shun; but othersome I eschew as much as any saint can
doe.  The Peripatetikes doe also disavow this connexitie and
indissoluble knitting together.  And Aristotle is of opinion that a
wise and just man may be both intemperate and incontinent.  Socrates
avowed unto them, who in his phisiognomie perceived some inclination
unto vice, that indeed it was his naturall propension, but that by
discipline he had corrected the same.  And the familiar friends of the
Philosopher Stilpo were went to say, that being borne subject unto
wine and women, he had, by studie, brought himself to abstaine from
both.  On the other side; what good I have, I have it by the lot of my
birth: I have it neither by law nor prescription, {Antonio+} nor

----- 1 JUV.  Sat. viii. 164.

by any apprentiship.  The innocericie that is in me is nde of
simple-plaine innocencie, ivitbout vigor or art.  Amongst all other
vices, there is none I hate more than Crueltie, both by nature and
judgement, as the extremist of all vices. {Prospero+} But it is with
such an yearning and faint-hartednesse, that if I see but a chickins
necke puld off, or a pigge stickt, I cannot chuse but grieve, and I
cannot well endure a seelie dewbedabled hare to groane when she is
seized upon by the houndes, although hunting be a violent pleasure.
Those that are to withstand voluptuousnesse doe willingly use this
argument, to shew it is altogether vicious and unreasonable: That
where she is in her greatest prime and chiefe strength, she doth so
over-sway us, that reason can have no accesse unto us, and for a
further triall, alleage the experience wee feel and have of it in our
acquaintance with women.

  -----cum iam praesagit gaudia corpus Atque in eo est Venus, ut
  muliebria conserat arva./1


  When now the bodie doth light-joyes fore-know,

  And Venus set the womans fields to sow.

Where they thinke pleasure doth so far transport us beyond our selves,
that our discourse, then altogether overwhelmed, and our reason wholie
ravished in the gulfe of sensualitie, cannot by any meanes discharge
her function.  I know it may be otherwise: and if a man but please, be
may sometimes, even upon the verie instant cast his mind on other
conceits.  But she must be strained to a higher key, and heedfully
pursued.  I know a man may gourmandize the earnest and
thoughtconfounding violence of that pleasure: for I may with some
experience speak of it, and I have not found Venus+ to be so imperious
a Goddesse as many, and more reformed than my selfe, witnesse her to
be.  I thinke it not a wonder, as doth the Queene of Navarre, in one
of the tales of her Heptameron (which, respecting the subject it
treateth of, is a verie prettie booke) nor doe I deeme it a matter of
extreame difficultie for

----- 1 LUCR 1. iv. 1097.

a man to weare out a whole night, in all opportunitie and libertie, in
companie of a faire mistresses long time before sued-unto, and by him
desired; religiously keeping his word, if be have engaged himselfe, to
be contented with simple kisses and plaine touching.  I am of opinion
that the example of the sport in hunting would more fit the same:
wherein as there is lesse pleasure, so there is more distraction and
surprising, whereby our reason being amazed, looseth the leasure to
prepare her selfe against it: when as after a long game, the beast
doth suddenly start, or rowse up before us, and haply in such a place
where we least expected the same. That suddaine motion and the
earnestnesse of showting, jubeting and hallowing, still ringing in our
eares, would make it verie hard for those who love that kind of close
or chamber-hunting, at that verie instant, to withdraw their thoughts
elsewhere.  And poets make Diana victoriously to triumph both over the
firebrand and arrowes of Cupid.

  Quis non malarum quas amor curas habet

  Haec inter obliviscitur/1

  While this is doing, who doth not forget

  The wicked cares wherewith Love's heart doth fret?

But to returne to my former discourse, I have a verie feeling and
tender compassion of other mens afflictions, and should more easily
weep for companie sake, if possible for any occasion whatsoever I
could shed teares.  There is nothing sooner moveth teares in me than
to see others weepe, not onely fainedly, but howsoever, whether truly
or forcedly. I do not greatly waile for the dead, but rather envie
them.  Yet doe I much waile and moane the dying.  The canibales+ and
savage people do not so much offend me with roasting and eating of
dead bodies; as those which torment and persecute the living.  Let any
man be executed by law, how deservedly soever, I cannot endure to
behold the execution with an unrelenting eye. Some one going

----- 1 HOR.  Epod. ii. 37.

about to witnesse the clemencie of lulius Caesar; 'He was,' saith he,
'tractable and milde in matters of revenge.  Having compelled the
pirates to yeeld themselves unto him, who had before taken him
prisoner and put him to ransome, forasmnch as he had threatned to have
them all crucified, he condemned them to that kind of death, but it
was after he had caused them to be strangled.  Philemon his
secretarie, who would have poysoned him, had no sharper punishment of
him than an ordinarie death.  Without mentioning the Latin Author, who
for a testimonie of clemencie, dared to alleage the onely killing of
those by whom a man hath been offended, it may easily be guessed that
he is tainted with vile and horrible examples of cruelties such as
Romane Tyrants brought into fashion.  As for me, even in matters of
justice, whatsoever is beyond a simple death, I deeme it to be meere
crueltie: and especiall amongst us, who ought to have a regardfull
respect that their soules should be sent to heaven, which cannot be,
having first by intolerable tortures agitated, and as it were brought
them to dispaire.  A souldier, not long since, being a prisoner, and
perceiving from a loft a tower, where he was kept, that store of
people flocked together on a greene, and carpenters were busie at
worke to erect a skaffold, suppposing the same to be for him, as one
desperat, resolved to kill himselfe, and searching up and downe for
something to make himselfe away, found nothing but an old rustie
cart-naile, which fortune presented him with; he tooke it, and
therewithall, with all the strength he had, strooke and wounded
himselfe twice in the throat, but seeing it would not rid him of life,
he then thrust it into his bellie up to the head, where he left it
fast- sticking.  Shortly after, one of his keepers coming in unto him,
and yet living, finding him in that miserable plight, but weltring in
his goare-blood and readie to gaspe his last, told the Magistrates of
it, which, to prevent time before he should die, hastned to pronounce
sentence against him: which when he heard, and that he was onely
condemned to have his head cut off, he seemed to take heart of grace
againe, and to be sorie for what be had done, and tooke some
comfortable drinks, which before be had refused, greatly thanking the
Judges for his unhoped gentle condemnation: And told them, that for
feare of a more, sharply-cruell, and intolerable death by law, he had
resolved to prevent it by some violent manner of death, having by the
preparations he had seen the carpenters make, and by gathering of
people together, conceived an opinion that they would torture him with
some horrible torment, and seemed to be delivered from death onely by
the change of it.  Were I worthie to give counsell, I would have these
examples of rigor, by which superior powers goe about to keep the
common people in awe, to be onely exercised on the bodies of criminall
malefactors: {usthem+} For, to see them deprived of Christian buriall,
to see them haled, disbowelled, parboyled, and quartered, might haply
touch the common sort as much as the paines they make the living to
endure: howbeit in effect it be little or nothing, as saith God, Qui
corpus occidunt, et postea non habent quod faciant./1 'Those that kill
the bodie', but have afterwards no more to doe:' And Poets make the
horror of this picture greatly to prevaile, yea, and above death,

  Heu reliquias semiassi Regis, denudatis ossibus,

  Per terram sanie delibutas foede divexarier./2

  O that the reliques of an halfe burnt King, bones bared,

  On earth besmear'd with filth, should be so fouly marred.

It was my fortune to be at Rome upon a day that one Catena, a
notorious high-way theefe, was executed: at his strangling no man of
the companie seemed to be mooved to any ruth; but when he came to be
quartered, the Executioner gave no blow that was not accompanied with
a piteous voyce and hartie exclamation, as if every man had had a
feeling sympathie, or lent his senses to the poor mangled wretch.
Such inhumane outrages and barbarous excesses should

----- 1 Luke xii. 4. 2 Cic.  Tusc.  Qu. 1.

be exercised against the rinde, and not practised against the
quicke. In a case somewhat like unto this, did Artaxerxes asswage and
mitigate the sharpnesse of the ancient lawes of Persia, appointing
that the Lords which had trespassed in their estate, whereas they were
wont to be whipped, they should be stripped naked, and their clothes
whipped for them; and where they were accustomed to have their haire
pulled off, they should onely have their hat taken off.  The
Aegyptians, so devout and religious, thought they did sufficiently
satisfie divine Justice, in sacrificing painted and counterfeit hogges
unto it: An over-hardy invention to go about with pictures and
shadowes to appease God, a substance so essentiall and divine. I live
in an age wherein we abound with incredible examples of this vice,
through the licentiousnesse of our civill and intestine warres: and
read all ancient stories, be they never so tragicall, you shall flnd
none to equall those we daily see practised.  But that hath nothing
made me acquainted with it.  I could hardly be perswaded before I had
seene it, that the world could have afforded so marble-hearted and
savage-minded men, that for the onely pleasure of murther would commit
it; then cut, mangle, and hacke other members in pieces to rouze and
sharpen their wits, to invent unused tortures and unheard-of torments:
to devise new and unknowne deaths, and that in cold blood, without any
former enmitie or quarrell, or without any gaine or profit; and onely
to this end, that they may enjoy the pleasing spectacle of the
languishing gestures, pitifull notions, horror-moving yellings, deep
fetcht groanes, and lamentable voyces of a dying and drooping man.
For that is the extremest point whereunto the crueltie of man may
attaine.  Ut homo hominem, non iratus, non timens, tantum spectaturus
occidat;/1 'That one man should kill another, neither being angrie nor
afeard, but onely to looke on.  As for me, I could never so much as
endure, without remorse or griefe, to see a poore, sillie, and
innocent beast pursued and killed, which is

----- 1 SEN.  Clem. 1. ii. c. 4.

harmlesse and void of defence, and of whom we receive no offence at
all.  And as it commonly hapneth, that when the Stag begins to be
embost, and finds his strength to faile him, having no other remedie
left him, doth yeeld and bequeath himselfe unto us that pursue him,
with teares suing to us for mercie:

  ----- questque cruentus

  Atque imploranti similis:/1


  With blood from throat, and teares from eyes,

  It seemes that he for pittie cryes:

was ever a grievous spectacle unto me.  I seldom take any beast alive
but I give him his libertie.  Pythagoras was wont to buy fishes of
fishers, and birds of fowlers to set them free againe.

  ----- primoque a caede ferarum

  Incaluisse puto maculatum sanguine ferrum./2


  And first our blades in blood embrude deeme

  With slaughter of poore beasts did reeking steeme.

Such as by nature shew themselves bloodie-minded towards harmlesse
beasts, witnesse a naturall propension unto crueltie. After the
ancient Romanes had once enured themselves without horror to behold
the slaughter of wild beasts in their shewes, they came to the murther
of men and Gladiators.  Nature (I fear me) hath of her owne selfe
added unto man a certaine instinct to inhumanitie.  No man taketh
delight to see wild beasts sport and wantonly to make much one of
another: Yet all are pleased to see them tugge, mangle, and enterteare
one another.  And lest any bodie should jeast at this sympathie, which
I have with them, Divinitie itselfe willeth us to shew them some
favour: And considering that one selfe-same master (I mean that
incomprehensible worlds-framer) hath placed all creatures in this his
wondrous palace for his service, and that they, as well as we, are of
his household:

----- 1 VIRG.  AEn. 1. vii. 521. 2 OVID.  Metam. 1. xv. 106.

I say it hath some reason to injoyne us to shew some respect and
affection towards them.  Pythagoras borrowed etempsychosis of the
AEgyptians, but since it hath been received of divers Nations, and
especially of our Druides:

  Morte carent animae, semperique priore relicta

  Sede, novis domibus vivunt, habitantque receptae./1

  Our death-lesse soules, their former seats refrained,

  In harbors new live and lodge entertained.

The Religion of our ancient Gaules inferred, that soules being
eternall, ceased not to remove and change place from one bodie to
another: to which fantasie was also entermixed some consideration of
divine justice.  For, according to the soules behaviors, during the
time she had been with Alexander, they sayd that God appointed it
another bodie to dwell in either more or lesse painfull, and suitable
to her condition.

  ----- muta ferarum

  Cogit vincla pati truculentos ingerit ursis,


  Praedonesque lupis, fallaces vilpibus addit.

  Atque per varios annos per mille figuras

  Egit, letheo purgatos flumine tandem

  Rursus ad humanae revocat primordia formae./2

  Dumbe hands of beasts he makes men's soules endure,

  Blood-thirstie soules he doth to Beares enure,

  Craftie to Foxes, to Woolves bent to rapes;

  Thus when for many yeares, through many shapes,

  He hath them driv'n in Lethe lake at last,

  Them purg'd he turns to mans forms whence they past.



If the soule had been valiant, they placed it in the bodie of a Lion:
if Voluptuous, in a Swine: if faint-harted, in a Stagge or a Hare; if
malicious, in a Foxe; and so of the, rest, untill that being purified
by this punishment, it re-assumed and tooke the bodie of some other
man againe.

----- 1 OVID.  Metam. 1. xv. 158. 2 CLAUD. in Ruff. 1. ii. 482.

  Ipse ego, nam memini, Troiani tempore belli

  Panthoides Euphorbus eram,/1

  When Troy was won, I, as I call to mind,

  Euphorbus was, and Panthus sonne by kind,

As touching that alliance betweene us and beasts, I make no great
accompt of it, nor do I greatly admit it, neither of that which divers
Nations, and namely of the most ancient and noble, who have not onely
received beasts into their societie and companie, but allowed them a
place farre above themselves; sometimes deeming them to be familiars
and favored of their Gods, and holding them in a certaine awfull
respect and reverence more than humane, and others acknowledging no
other God nor no other Divinity than they.  Belluae a barbaris propter
beneficium consecratae:/2 'Beasts by the Barbarians were made sacred
for some benefit.'

  ----- crocodilon adorat Pars haec, illa pavet saturam serpentibus
  Ibin,


  Effigies sacri hic nitet aurea Corcopitheci./3

  This Country doth the Crocodile adore,

  That feares the Storks glutted with Serpents gore,

  The sacred Babion here,

  In gold shape doth appeare.


  -----hic piscem fluminis, illic

  Oppida t
  
  ota canem venerantur./4


  A fish here whole Townes reverence most,

  A dog they honour in that coast.

And the very same interpretation that Plutarke giveth unto this error,
which is very well taken, is also honourable for them.  For, he saith,
that (for example sake) it was neither the Cat nor the Oxe that the
AEgyptians adored, but that in those beasts they worshipped some image
of divine faculties.  In this patience and utility, and in that
vivacity, or as our neighbours the Burgundians with all Germany the
impatience to see themselves shut up: Whereby they

----- 1 OVID.  Metam. 1. xv. 160. 2 JUVEN.  Sat. xv. 2. 3 CIC.  Nat.
Deor. 1. i. c. 86. 4 Ibid. 7.

represented the liberty which they loved and adored beyond all other
divine faculty, and so of others.  But when amongst the most moderate
opinions I meet with some discourses that goe about and labour to shew
the &rC resemblance betweene us and beasts, and what share they have
in our greatest privileges, and with how much likely-hood they are
compared unto us, truly I abate much of our presumption, and am easily
removed from that imaginary soveraigntie that some& ve and ascribe
unto us above all other creatures. If g&ll that were to be
contradicted, yet is there a kinde of respect and a generall duty of
humanity which tieth us not only unto brute beasts that have life and
sense, but even unto trees and plants.  Unto men we owe Justice, and
to all other creatures that are capable of it, grace and
benignity. There is a kinde of enterchangeable commerce and mutual
bond betweene them and us.  I am not ashamed nor afraid to declare the
tendernesse of my childish Nature which is such that I cannot well
reject my Dog if he chance (although out of season) to fawne upone me,
or beg of me to play with him.  The Turkes have almes and certaine
hospitals appointed for brute beasts.  The Romans have a publike care
to breed and nourish Geese,&by whose vigilance their capital had beene
saved.  The Athenians did precisely ordaine that all manner of Mules
which had served or beene imploied about the building of their temple
called Hecatorn&%doil should be free and suffered to feed wheresoever
they pleased, without any let or impeachment.  The Agrigentines had an
ordinary custome seriously and solemnly to bury all such beasts as
they had held deare; as horses of rare worth and merit speciall dogs,
choice or profitable birds, or such as had but served to make their
children sport.  And the sumptnous magnificence which in all other
things was ordinary and peculiar unto them, appeared also almost
notably in the stately sumptuousnesse and costly number of monuments
erected to that end, which many ages after have endured and been
maintained in pride and state.  The AEgyptians were wont to bury their
Wolves, their Dogs, their Cats, their Beares, and Crocodiles in holy
places, embalming their carcasses, and at their deaths, to weare
mourning weeds for them.  Cymon caused a stately honourable tombe to
be erected for the Mares, wherewith he had three times gained the
prize at running in the Olimpike games.  Ancient Xantippus caused his
Dog to be enterred upon a hill by the sea shore, which ever since hath
beene named by him.  And Plutarch (as himselfe saith) made it a matter
of conscience, in hope of a small gaine to sell or send an Oxe to the
shambles that had served him a long time.  CHAPTER 2.XII+ AN APOLOGIE
OF RAYMOND SEBOND


KNOWLEDGE is without all Contradiction a most profitable and chiefe
ornament, Those who despise it declare evidently their sottishnesse:
Yet doe not I value it at so excessive a rate as some have done;
namely Herillus the Philosopher, who grounded his chiefe felicitie
upon it, and held that it lay in her power to make us content and
wise: which I cannot beleeve, nor that which others have said, that
Knowledge is the mother of all vertue, and that all vice proceedeth of
ignorance.  Which if it be it is subject to a large interpretation.
My house hath long since ever stood open to men of understanding, and
is very well knowne to many of them: for my father, who commanded the
same fifty yeeres and upward, set on fire by that new kinde of
earnestnesse wherewith King Francis the first imbraced Letters, and
raised them unto credit, did with great diligence and much cost
endevour to purchase the acquaintance of learned men; receiving and
entertaining them as holy persons, and who had some particular
inspiration of divine wisdom; collecting their sentences and
discourses as if they had beene Oracles; and with so much more
reverence and religious regard by how much lesse authority hee had to
judge of them: for hee had no knowledge of Letters no more than his
predecessors before him.  As for mee I love them indeed, but yet I
worship them not.  Amongst others, Peter Bunel (a man in his time by
reason of his learning of high esteeme) having sojourned a few daies
at Montaigne with my father and others of his coat being ready to
depart thence, presented him with a booke entituled Theologia
naturalis; sive liber creaturarum magistri Raimondi de Sebonde.  And
for so much as the Italian and Spanish tongues were very familiar unto
him, and that the book was written in a kinde of latinized Spanish,
whereof divers words had Latine terminations; he hoped that with
little aid he might reape no small profit by it, and commended the
same very much unto him, as a booke most profitable, and fitting the
dayes in which he gave it him.  It was even at what time the new
fangles of Luther began to creepe in favour, and in many places to
shake the foundation of our ancient beleefe.  Wherein he seemed to be
well advised, as be who by discourse of reason fore-saw that this
budding disease would easily turne to an execrable Atheisme: For the
vulgar wanting the faculty to judge of things by themselves, suffering
it selfe to be carried away by fortune and led on by outward
appamraces, if once it be possessed with the boldnesse to despise and
malapertnesse to impugne the opinions which tofore it held in awful
reverence (as are those wherein consisteth their salvation) and that
some articles of their religion be made doubtfull and questionable,
they will soon and easily admit an equal uncertainty in all other
parts of their beleefe, as they that had no other grounded authoritie
or foundation but such as are now shaken and weakned, and immediately
reject (as a tyrannical yoke) all impressions they had in former times
received by the authoritie of Lawes, or reverence of ancient custome.

  Nam cupide conculcatur nimis anti metutum./1

  That which we fear'd before too much,

  We gladly scorne when tis not such.

Undertaking thenceforward to allow of nothing, except they have first
given their voice and particular consent to the same.  My father, a
few daies before his death, lighting by chance upon this booke, which
before he had neglected, amongst other writings commanded

----- 1 LUCR. 1. v. 1150.

mee to translate the same into French.  It is easie to translate such
Authors, where nothing but the matter is to be represented; but hard
and dangerous to undertake such as have added much to the grace and
elegancy of the language, namely to reduce them into a weaker and
poorer tongue. It was a strange taske and new occupation for me: but
by fortune being then at leisure and unable to gainsay the
commandement of the best father that ever was, I came ere long (as
well as I could) to an end of it: wherein he toook singular delight,
and commanded the same to be printed, which accordingly was after his
decease performed.  I found the conceits of the author to be
excellent, the contexture of his worke well followed, and his project
full of pietie.  Now forasmuch as divers ammuse themselves to reade
it, and especially Ladies, to whom we owne most service, it hath often
beene my hap to help them, when they were reading it, to discharge the
booke of two principall objections, which are brought against the
same. His drift is bold, and his scope adventurous for he undertaketh
by humane and naturall reasons, to establish and verifie all the
articles of Christian religion against Atheists.  Wherein (to say
truth) I find him so resolute and so happy, as I deem it a thing
impossible to doe better in that argument, and thinke that none
equalleth him.  Which booke seeming to me both over-rich and
exquisite, being written by an author whose name is so little knowne,
and of whom all we know is, that be was a Spaniard, who about two
hundred yeeres since professed Physicke in Tholouse: I demanded once
of Adrianus Turnebus (a man who knew all things) what such a booke
might be; who answered, that he deemed the same to be some
Quintessence extracted from out Saint Thomes Aquinas: For, in good
truth, onely such a spirit fraught with so infinite erudition, and so
full admirable subtilities was capable of such and so rare
imitiations.  So it is, that whosoever be the author or deviser of it
(the title whereof ought not without further reason to be taken from
Sebond) he was a very sufficient-worthie man, and endowed with sundrie
other excellent qualities. The first thing he is reproved for in his
Booke is, that Christians wrong themselve much, in that they ground
their beleefe upon humane reasons, which is conceived but by faith and
by a particular inspiration of God. Which objection seemeth to
containe some zeale of pietie; by reason whereof we ought, with so
much more mildnes and regard, endevour to satisfie them that propose
it.  It were a charge more befitting a man conversant, and sutable to
one acquainted with the holy Scriptures, than me, who am altogether
ignorant in them.  Neverthelesse I thinke, that even as to a matter so
divine and high, and so much exceeding al humane understanding, as is
this verity, wherwith it hath pleased the goodness of God to enlighten
as, it is most requisit that he affoord and lend us his helpe; And
that; with an extraordinary and privileged favour, that so we may the
better conceive and entertaine the same: For, I suppose that meanes
meerely humane can no way be capable of it; which if they were, so
many rare and excellent mindes, and so plenteously stored with
naturall faculties, as have beene in times past, would never by their
discourse have mist the attayning of this knowledge.  It is faith
onely which lively and assuredly embraceth the high mysteries of our
Religion. And no man can doubt but that it is a most excellent and
commendable enterprise, properly to accommodate and fit to the service
of our faith, the natural helpes and humane implements which God hath
bestowed upon us.  And no question is to be made but that it is the
most honourable employment we can put them unto; and that there is no
occupation or intent more worthy a good Christian, than by all meanes,
studies, and imaginations, carefully to endevour how to embellish,
amplifie, and extend the truth of his beleefe and religion.  It is not
enough for us to serve God in spirit and soule; we owe him besides,
and wee yeeld unto him, a corporall worshipping; we applie our limbs,
our motions, and all external things, to honour him.  The like ought
to be done, and we should accompany our faith with all the reason we
possesse: Yet alwayes with this proviso, that we thinke it doth not
depend of us, and that all our strength and arguments can never
attaine to so supernaturall and divine a knowledge: Except it seize
upon us, and as it were enter into us by an extraordinarie infusion:
And unlesse it also enter into us not onely by discourse, but also by
humane meanes, she is not in her dignitie nor in her glorie.  And
verily I feare therfore, that except this way, we should not enjoy it.
Had we fast-hold on God; by the interposition of a lively faith; had
we hold-fast on God by himselfe, and not by us; had we a divine
foundation; then should not humane and worldly occasions have the
power so to shake and totter us, as they have.  Our hold would not
then yeeld to so weake a batterie: The love of noveltie; the
constrainte of Princes; the good successe of one partie; the rash and
casuall changing of our opinions, should not then have the power to
shake and alter our beleefe.  We should not suffer the same to be
troubled at the wil and pleasure of a new argument, and at the
perswasion , no, not of all the rhetorike that ever was we should
withstand these boistrous billowes with an inflexible and unmoveable
constancie+:

  Illisos fluctus rupes, ut vasta refundit

  Et varias circumlatrantes dissipat undas,

  Mole sua./1

  As huge rocks doe regorge th' invective waves,

  And dissipate the billowes brawling braves,

  Which these gainst those still bellowe out.

  Those being big and standing stout.

If this raie of Divinitie did in any sort touch us, it would everie
where appeare: Not only our words, but our actions, would beare some
shew and lustre of it.  Whatsoever should proceed from us, might be
seene inlightned with this noble and matchlesse brightness. We should
blush for shame, that in humane sects there

----- 1 VIRG.  AEn. 1. vii. 587.

was never any so factious, what difficultie or strangenesse soever his
doctrine maintained, but some sort conforme his behaviors and square
his life unto it: Whereas so divine and heavenly an institution never
markes Christians but by the tongue.  And will you see whether it be
so?  Compare but our manners unto a Turke, or a Pagan, and we must
needs yeeld unto them: Whereas in respect of our religious
superioritie, we ought by much, yea by an incomparable distance,
out-shine them in excellencie: And well might a man say, Are they so
just, so charitable, and so good?  Then must they be Christians.  All
other outward shewes and exterior apparences are common to all
religious: As hope, affiance, events, ceremonies, penitence, and
martyrdoms.  The peculiar badge of our truth should be vertue; As it
is the heavenliest and most difficult marke, and worthiest production
of Verity it selfe, And therefore was our good Saint Lewis in the
right, when that Tartarian King, who was become a Christian, intended
to come to Lyons, to kisse the Popes feet, and there to view the
sanctitie he hoped to find in our lives and manners, instantly to
divert him from it, fearing lest our dissolute manners and licentious
kind of life might scandalize him, and so alter his opinion
fore-conceived of so sacred a religion.  Howbeit the contrary happened
to another, who for the same effect being come to Rome, and there
viewing the disolutenesse of the Prelates and people of those dayes,
was so much the more confirmed in our religion; considering with
himselfe what force and divinity it must of consequence have, since it
was able, amidst so many corruptions and so viciously- poluted hands,
to maintaine her dignitie and splendor.  Had wee but one onely graine
of faith, wee should then be able to remove mountaines from out their
place, saith the Holy Writ.  Our actions being guided and accompanied
with Divinitie, should not then be meerely humane, but eveil as our
beliefe, containe some wonder-causing thing.  Brevis est institutio
vitae honestae beataeque, si credas: 'The institution of an honest and
blessed life is but short, if a man beleeve.  Some make the world
beleeve that they beleeve things they never doe.  Others (and they are
the greater number) perswade themselves they doe so, as unable to
conceive what it is to beleeve.  We thinke it strange if in warres,
which at this time doe so oppresse our state we see the events to
float so strangely, and with so common and ordinarie a manner to
change and alter: The reason is, we adde nothing unto it but our owne.
Justice, which is on the one side, is used but for a cloake and
ornament; she is indeed alleadged, but not received, nor harboured,
nor wedded.  She is as in the mouth of a Lawyer, and not as she ought
in the heart and affection of the partie.  God oweth his
extraordinarie assistance unto faith and religion, and not to our
passions.  Men are but directors unto it and use religion for a show:
It ought to be cleane contrarie. Doe hot marke if we doe not handle it
as it were a peece of waxe, from out so right and so firme a rule, to
draw so many contrary shapes.  When was this better seene than
now-adaies in France?  Those which have taken it on the left, and
those who have taken it on the right hand: Such as speake the false,
and such who speake the truth of it, do so alike employ and fit the
same to their violent and ambitious enterprises, proceede unto it with
so conformable a proceeding in riotousnesse and injustice, they make
the diversitie they pretend in their opinions doubtfull, and hard to
be beleeved, in a thing from which depends the conduct and law of our
life.  Can a man see from one same Schoole and Discipline, more united
and like customes and fashions to proceed?  View but the horrible
impudencie wherewith we tosse divine reasons to and fro, and how
irreligiously wee have both rejected and taken them againe, according
as fortune hath in these publike stormes transported us from place to
place.  This solemne proposition: Whether it be lawfull for a subject,
for the defence of religion, to rebell and take armes against his
Prince: Call but to minde in what mouthes but a twelve-moneth agoe the
affirmative of the same was the chiefe pillar of the one part; the
negative was the maine-underprop of the other: And listen now from
whence commeth the voyce and instruction of one and other: and whether
armes clatter and clang less for this than for that cause.  And we
burne those men which say that truth must be made to abide the yoke of
our need: And how much worse doth France than speak it.  Let us
confesse the truth: he that from out this lawfull armie should cull
out first those who follow it for meere zeale of a religious affection
than such as only regard the defence and protection of their countries
lawes or service of their Prince; whether hee could ever erect a
compleat company of armed men.  How comes it to passe that so few are
found who have still held one same wil and progresse in our publike
revolutions, and that we see them now and then but faintly and
sometimes as fast as they can headlong to runne into the action?  And
the same men, now by their violence and rashnesse, and now through
their slowness demissnes, and heavines to spoile, and as it were
overthrow our affaires, but that ihey are thrust into them by casual
motives, and particular consideration, according to the diversities
wherewith they are moved?  I plainly perceive we lend nothing unto
devotion but the offices that flatter our passions. There is no
hostilitie so excellent as that which is absolutely Christian. Our
zeale worketh wonders, whenever it secondeth our inclinations towards
hatred, crueltie, ambition, avarice, detraction, or rebellion.
Towards goodnes, benignitie, or temperance it goeth but slowly, and
against the haire, except miraculously, some rare complexion leade him
unto it, it neither runnes nor flieth to it.  Our religion was
ordained to root out vices, but it shrowdeth, fostreth, and provoketh
them.  As commonly we say, 'We must not make a foole of God.  Did we
believe in him, I say not through faith, but with a simple beleefe;
yea (I speake it to our confusion) did we but beleeve and know him, as
wee doe another storie, or as one of our companions; we should then
love him above all other things, by reason of the infinite goodnes and
unspeakable beauty that is and shines in him: Had he but the same
place in our affections that riches, Pleasures, glory, and our friends
have: The best of us doth not so much feare to wrong him as he doth to
injure his neighbour, his kinsman, or his master.  Is there so simple
a minde who, on the one side having before him the object of one of
our vicious pleasures, and on the other to his full view perfect
knowledge and assured perswasion, the state of an immortall glorie,
that would enter into contention of one for the other?  And so we
often refuse it through meere contempt: for what drawes us to
blaspheming, unlesse it be at all adventures, the desire it selfe of
the offence?  The Philosopher Antisthenes, when he was initiated in
the mysteries of Orpheus, the priest saying unto him that such as
vowed themselves to that religion should after death receive eternall
and perfect felicities, replied, 'If thou beleeve it, why dost thou
not die thy selfe?  Diogenes more roughly (as his manner was) and
further from our purpose, answered the priest who perswaded him to be
one of his order, that so he might come unto and attaine the
happinesse of the other world: 'Wilt thou have me beleeve that those
famous men, Agesilaus and Epaminondas, shall be miserable, and that
thou, who art but an asse, and doth nothing of any worth; shalt be
happy, because thou art a Priest?  Did we but receive these large
promises of everlasting blessednesse with like authoritie as we do a
philosophicall discourse, we should not then have death in that horror
as we have:

  Non jam se moriens dissolvi conquereretur,

  Sed magis ire foras, vestemque relinquere ut anguis

  Gauderet, praelonga senex aut cornua cervus./1

  He would not now complains to be dissolved dying,

  But rather more rejoice, that now he is forth-flying,

  Or as a Snake his coat out-worne,

  Or as old Harts, doth cast his horne.

----- 1 LUCRET. iii. 630

I will be dissolved, should we say, and be with Jesus Christ.  The
forcible power of Platoes discourse of the immortality of the soule
provoked divers of his Schollers unto death, that so they might more
speedily enjoy the hopes he told them of.  All which is a most evident
token that we receive our religion but according to our fashion and by
our owne hands, and no otherwise than other religions are received. We
are placed in the countrie where it was in use; where we regard her
antiquity, or the authority of those who have maintained her; where we
fears the menaces wherewith she threatneth all misbeleevers, or follow
her promises.  The considerations ought to be applied and employed to
our beleefe, but as subsidiaries: they be human bonds.  Another
country, other testimonies, equall promises, alike menaces, might
semblaby imprint a cleane contrary religion in us: we are Christians
by the same title as we are either Perigordins or Germans.  And as
Plato saith: 'There are few so confirmed in Atheisme but some great
danger will bring unto the knowledge of God's divine power.  The part
doth not touch or concerne a good Christians: It is for mortall and
worldly religions to be received by a humane convoy. What faith is
that like to be which cowardice of heart doth plant and weaknesse
establish in us?  A goodly faith, that beleeves that which it
beleeveth onely because it wanteth the courage not to beleeve the
same.  A vicious passion, as that of inconstancie and astonishment is,
can it possibly ground any regular production in our mindes or soules?
They establish, saith he, by the reason of their judgement, that
whatsoover is reported of hell, or of after-comming paines, is but a
fiction: but the occasions to make triall of it, offering itselfe at
what time age or sicknesse doth summon them to death, the errour of
the same, through the horrour of their future condition, doth then
replenish them with another kind of beleefe.  And because such
impressions make mens hearts fearfull, hee by his lawes inhibiteth all
instruction of such threats and the perswasion that any evill may come
unto man from the Gods, except for his greater good, and for a
medicinable effect, whensoever he falleth into it.  They report of
Bion that being infected with the Atheismes of Theodorus, he had for a
long time made but a mockerie of religious men; but when death did
once seize upon him he yeelded unto the extremest superstitious: As if
the Gods would either be removed or come again, according to Bions
businesses Plato and these examples conclude that we are brought to
beleeve in God either by reason or by compulsion, Atheisme being a
proposition as unnaturall and monstrous as it is hard and uneasie to
be established in any mans minde, how insolent and unruly soever he
may be: many have beene seene to have conceived either through vanitie
or fiercenesse, strange and seld-knowne opinion, as if they would
become reformers of the world by affecting a profession only in
countenance: who though they be sufficiently foolish, yet are they not
powerfull enough to ground or settle it in their consciences.  Yet
will not such leave to lift up their joyned hands to heaven, give them
but a stoccado on their breast: and when fear shall have supprest, or
sicknesse vanquished this licentious fervour of a wavering minde, then
will they suffer themselves gently to be reclaimed, and discreetly to
be perswaded to give credit unto true beliefe and publike examples.  A
decree seriously digested is one thing, and these shallow and
superficiall impressions another, which bred by the dissolutenesse of
a loose spirit, doe rashly and uncertainely float up and downe the
fantasie of a man.  Oh men, most braine-sicke and miserable, that
endeavour to be worse than they can!  The errour of Paganisme and the
ignorance of our sacred truth, was the cause of this great
soules-fall: but onely great in worldly greatnes; also in this next
abuse, which is, that children and old men are found to be more
susceptible or capable of religion, as if it were bred and had her
credit from our imbecillitie.  The bond which should binde our
judgement, tie our will, enforce and joyne our soules to our Creator,
should be a bond taking his doubling and forces, not THE SECOND BOOIKE
<Mont2-151> from our considerations, reasons, and passions, but from a
divine and supernaturall compulsion, having but one forme, one
countenance, and one grace ; which is the authoritie and grace of God,
Now our heart being ruled and our soule commanded by faith, reason
willeth that she drawes all our other parts to the service of her
intent, according to their power and facultie. Nor is it likely but
that this vast worlds-frame must beare the impression of some markes,
therein imprinted by the hand of this great wondrous architect,-and
that even in all things therein created there must be some image,
somewhat resembling and having coherencie with the workeman that
wrought and framed them.  He hath left imprinted in these higlh and
misterious works the characters of his divinitie: and onely our
imbecilitie is the cause wee can not discover nor read them.  It is
that which himselfe telleth us, that by his visible operations be doth
manifest those that are invisible to us.  Sebond hath much travelled
about this worthie studie, and sheweth us, that there is no parcell of
this world that either belyeth or shameth his Maker.  It were a
manifest wronging of God's goodnesse if all this universe did not
consent and sympathise with our beleefe.  Heaven, earth, the elements,
our bodies, our soule, yea all things else, conspire and agree unto
it: onely the meanes how to make use of them must be found out: They
will instruct us sufficiently, be we but capable to learne and to to
understand.  For this world is a most holy temple, into which man is
brought there to behold statues and images not wrought by mortall
hand, but such as the secret thought of God hath made sensible, as the
Sunne, the Starres, the Waters and the Earth, thereby to represent the
intelligible unto us. 'The invisible things of God,' saith St.  Paul,
'doe evidently appeae by the creation of the world, judgeing of his
eternall Wisdome and Divinity by his workes.

  Atque adeo faciem coeli non invidet orbi

  Ipse Deus, vultusque suos corpusque recludit

  Semper volvendo! seque ipsum inculcat et offert

  Ut bene coqnosci possit, doceatque videndo

  Qualis est, doceatque suas attendere leges./1

  God to the world doth not heav'ns face envie,

  But by still moving it doth notifie

  His face and essence, doth himselfe applie,

  That he may well be knowen, and teach by seeing,

  How he goes, how we should marke his decreeing.


Now our reason and humane discourse is as the lumpish and barren
matter, and the Grace of God is the form thereof. 'Tis that which
giveth both fashion and worth unto it.  Even as the vertuous actions
of Socrates and Cato are but frivolous and unprofitable because they
had not their end, and regarded not the love and obedience of the true
creator of all things, and namely, because they were ignorant of the
true knowledge of God: So is it of our imaginations and discourse;
they have a kind of body, but a shapelesse masse, without light or
fashion , unlesse faith and the grace of God be ioyned thereunto.
Faith, giving as it were a tincturo and lustre unto Sebonds arguments,
make them the more firme and solid: They may well serve for a
direction and guide to a young learner, to lead and set him in the
right way of this knowledge.  They in some sort fashion and make him
capable of the grace of God, by meanes whereof our beliefe is
afterwards achieved and made perfect.  I know a man of authority,
brought up in letters, who confessed unto me that he was reclaimed
from out the errours of mis-beleeving by the arguments of Sebond.  And
if it happen they be dispoyled of this ornament, and of the helpe and
approbation of faith, and taken but for meere humane fantazies, yet to
combat those that headlong are fallen into the dreadfull error and
horrible darkenesse of irreligious even then shall they be found as
firme and forcible as any other of that condition that may be opposed
against them.  So that we shall stand upon terms to say unto our
parties,

----- !MANIL. 1. iv. 840

  Si melius quid habes, accerse, vel imperium fer./1

  If you have any better, send for me,

  Or else that I bid you, contented be.


Let them either abide the force of our proofes, or show us some
others, upon some other subject, better compact and more full.  I have
in a manner unawares half engaged my selfe in the second objection, to
which I had purposed to frame an answer for Sebond.  Some of his
arguments are weake and simple to verifie what he would, and undertake
to front him easily.  Such fellowes must somewhat more roughly be
handled, for they are more dangerous and more malicious than the
first.  Man doth willingly apply other mens sayings to the advantage
of the opinions be hath fore-judged in himselfe. 'To an Atheist all
writings make for Atheisme.  He with his owne venome infecteth the
innocent matter.  These have some preoccupation of judgment that makes
their taste wallowish and tastelesse, to conceive the reasons of
Sebond.  As for the rest, they thinke to have faire play offered them
if they have free liberty to combat our religion with meere worldly
weapons; which they durst not charge, did they behold her in her
majesty, full of authority and commandement.  The meanes I use to
suppresse this frenzy,, and which seemeth the fittest for my purpose,
is to crush and trample this humane pride and fiercenesse under foot,
to make them feele the emptinesse, vacuitie, and no worth of man: and
violently to pull out of their hands the silly weapons of their
reason; to make them stoope, and bite and snarle at the ground, under
the authority and reverence of God's Majesty.  Onely to her belongeth
science and wisdome, it is she alone can judge of her selfe; and from
her we steale whatsoever we repute, value, and count ourselves to be.

  O. @ap IVOPOV46,@ 0 oe6y 14iy.n

  Of greater, better, wiser minde than he,

  God can abide no mortall man should be.


----- 1 HOR. 1. i.  Epist. v. 6. 2 Prov. iii. 14; James iv. 6; 1
Pet. v. 5.

Let us suppress this overweening, the first foundation of the tyrannie
of the wicked spirit.  Deus superbis resistit: humilibus autem dat
gratiam: 'God resisteth the proud, but giveth grace to the humble.
Plato saith 'that intelligence is in all the Gods, but little or
nothing at all in men.  Meanewhile it is a great comfort unto a
Christian man to see our mortall implements and fading tooles so fitly
sorted to our holy and divine faith; that when they are employed to
the mortal and fading subjects of their nature, they are never more
forcible nor more joyntlie appropriated unto them.  Let us then see
whether man hath an other stronger reasons in his power then Sebondes,
and whether it be in him, by argument or discourse, to come to any
certainty.  For, St.  Augustine, pleading against these kind of men,
because he would upbraid them with their injustice, in that they hold
the parts of our beleefe to be false, and that our reason faileth in
establishing them: and to shew that many things may be, and have
beene, whereof our discourse can never ground the nature and the
causes: he proposeth and setteth downe before them certaine knowen and
undoubted experiments, wherein man confesseth to see nothing, which he
doth as all things else, with a curious and ingenious search. More
must be done, and they must be taught, that to convince the weaknesse
of their reason we need not go far to cull out rare examples.  And
that it is so defective and blinde, as there is no facility so clear
that is clear enough unto her: that easie and uneasie is all one to
her; that all subjects equally, and Nature in generall disavoweth her
jurisdiction and interposition.  What preacheth truth unto us, when it
biddeth us flie and shun worldly philosophy; when it so often telleth
us 'that all our wisdome is but folly before God; that of all vanities
man is the greatest; that man, who presumeth of his knowledge, doth
not yet know what knowledge is: and that man, who is nothing, if he
but thinke to be something, seduceth and deceiveth bimselfe?  These
sentences of the Holy Ghost do so lively and manifestly expresse what
I would maintaine, as I should neede no proofe against such as with
all submission and obeysance would yeeld to his authority. But these
will needs be whipt to their owne cost, and cannot abide their reason
to be combatted, but by itselfe.  Let us now but consider man alone
without other help, armed but with his own weapons, and unprovided of
the grace and knowledge of God, which is all his honour, all his
strength, and all the ground of his being.  Let us see what hold-fast
or free- bold he hath in this gorgeous and goodly equipage.  Let him
with the utmost power of his discourse make me understand upon what
foundation he hath built those great advantages and ods he supposeth
to have over other creatures. Who hath perswaded him that this
admirable moving of heavens vaults, that the eternal light of these
lampes so fiercely rowling over his head, that the horror-moving and
continnall motion of this infinite vaste ocean were established, and
continue so many ages for his commoditie and service? Is it possible
to imagine anything so ridiculous as this miserable and wretched
creature, which is not so much as master of himselfe, exposed and
subject to offences of all things, and yet dareth call himselfe Master
and Emperour of this Universe?  In whose power it is not to know the
least part of it., much lesse to command the same.  And the Privileges
which he so fondly challengeth to be the onely absolute creature in
this huge worlds frame, perfectly able to know the absolute beautie
and several parts thereof, and that he is only of power to yeeld the
great architect thereof due thanks for it, and to keepe account both
of the receipts and layings out of the world.  Who hath sealed him his
patent?  Let him shew us his letters of privilegefor so noble and so
great a charge.  Have they been granted onely in favour of the wise?
Then concerne they but a few.  Are the foolish and wicked worthy of so
extraordinary a favour, who being the worst part of the world, should
they be preferred before the rest?  Shall we believe him: Quorum
igitur causa quis dixerit effectum esse mundum?  Eorum scilicet
animantium quo ratione utuntur.  Hi sunt dii et homines, quibus
profecto nihil est melius:/1 'For whose cause then shall a man say
that the world was made?'  In sooth, for those creatures sake which
have the use of reason; those are Gods and men, than whom assuredly
nothing is better.  We shall never sufficiently baffle the impudency
of this conjoyning.  But silly wretch, what hath he in him worthie
such an advantage?  To consider the incorruptible life of the
celestiall bodies, their beauty, greatnesse, and agitation, continued
with so just and regular a course.

  ----- cum suspicimus magni celestia mundi

  Templa super, stellisque micantibus Aethera fixum,


  Et venit in mentem Lunae Solisque viarum./2

  When we of this great world the heavenly temples see

  Above us, and the skies with shine-starres fixt to be,

  And marks in our discourse,

  Of Sunne and Moone the course.

To consider the power of domination these bodies have not onely upon
our lives and condition of our fortune.

  Facta etenim et vitas hominum suspendit ab astris./3

  For on the stars he doth suspend

  Of men, the deeds, the lives, and end.

But also over our dispositions and inclinations, our discourses and
wils, which they rule, provoke, and move at the pleasure of their
influences, as our reason finds and teacheth us.

  ----- speculataque longe

  Deprendit tacitis dominantia legibus astra.


  Et totum alterna mundum ratione moveri,

  Fatorumque vices certis discernere signis./4

  By speculation it from far discerns,

  How stars by secret lawes do guide our sterns,

  And this whole world is moov'd by entercourse

  And by sure signes of fates to know the course.


----- 1 CIC.  Nat.  Deor. 1. ii. 2 LUCR. 1. v. 1214. 3 MANIL.
Astron. 1. iii. 58. 4 MANIL.  Astron. 1. i. 62.

Seeing that not a man alone, nor a king only, but monarchies and
empires; yea, and all the world below is moved at the shaking of one
of the least heavenly motions.

  Quantaque quam parvi faciant discrimina motus:

  Tantum est hoc regnum quod regibus imperat ipsis./1


  How little motions make, how different affection:

  So great this Kingdoms is, that hath Kings in subjection.


If our vertue, vices, sufficiency and knowledge, and the same
discourse we make of the power of the starres, and the comparison
betweene them and us, commeth as our reason judgeth by their meane and
through their favour;

  -----furit alter amore, Et pontum tranare potest, et vertere Troiam,


  Alterius sors est scibendis legibus apta:

  Ecce patrem nati perimunt, natosque parentes,

  Mutuaque armati coeunt in vulnera fratres,

  Non nostrum hoc bellum est; coquntur tanta movere,

  Inque suas ferri ponas, lacerandaque membra:

  Hoc quoque fatale est sic ipsum expandere fatum:/2

  One with love madded, his love to enjoy

  Can crosse the seas, and overturns all Troy

  Anothers lot is to set lawes severe.

  Loe sonnes ill fathers, fathers sonnes destroy,

  Brothers for mutuall wounds their armes doe beare,

  Such war is not our owne, forc't are we to it,

  Drawne to our owne paines, our owne limbs to teare

  Fates so t'observe t'is fatall, we must doe it

If we hold that portion of reason, which we have from the distribution
of heaven, how can she make us equall unto it?  How can she submit his
essence and conditions unto our knowledge?  Whatsoever we behold in
those high bodies doth affright us:Quae molitio, quae ferramenta, qui
vectes, quo machinae, qui ministri tanti operis fuerunt?/3 'What
workmanship?  What yron- braces?  What maine beames, what engines?

----- 1 MANIL.  Astron. 1. i. 57, iv. 93. 2 Ib. 1. iv. 178. 3 CIC.
Nat.  Deor. 1. i.

  What masons and carpenters were to so great a worke?

  Why doe we then deprive them of soule, of life, and of discourse?

Have we discovered or knowen any unmoveable or insensible stupidity in
them?  We, who have no commerce but of obedience with them?  Shall we
say we have seene the use of a reasonable soule in no other creature
but in man?  What?  Have we seene anything comparable to the sunne?
Leaveth he to be, because we have seene nothing semblable unto it?
And doth he leave his moving because his equall is nowhere to be
found?  If that which we have not seene is not, our knowledge is that
wonderfull abridged.  Quae sunt tantae, animi angustia? 'What
narrownesse of my heart is such?  Be they not dreames of humane
vanity, to make a celestiall earth or world of the moone, as
Anaxagoras did?  And therein to plant habitations, and as Plato and
Plutarch doe, erect their colonies for our use.  And to make of our
knowne earth a bright shining planet? Inter caetera mortalitatis
incommoda, et hoc est caligo mentium: nec tantum necessitas errandi,
sed errorum amor:/1 'Among other discommodities of our mortality this
is one, there is darknesse in our minds, and in us not onely necessity
of erring, but a love of errors.' Corruptibile corpus aggravat animam,
et deprimit terrena inhabitatio sensum multa cogitantem:/2 XXX'Our
corruptible body doth overlode our soule, and our dwelling on earth
weighs downe our sense that is set to thinke of many matters.'
Presumption is our naturall and originall infirmitie.  Of all
creatures man is the most miserable and fraile, and therewithall the
proudest and disdainfullest. Who perceiveth and seeth himselfe placed
here amidst the filth and mire of the world, fast-tied and nailed to
the worst, most senselesse, and drooping part of the world, in the
vilest corner of the house, and farthest from heavens coape, with
those creatures that are the worst of the three conditions; and yet
dareth imaginarily place himself above the circle of the moon, and
reduce heaven under his feet.  It is through the vanitie of the

----- 1 SEN.  Ira. 1. ii. c. 9. 2 Ib.  Epist. xcv.

same imagination that he dare equall himself to God, that he ascribeth
divine conditions unto himself, that he selecteth and separateth
himselfe from out the ranke of other creatures; to which his
fellow-brethren and compeers he cuts out and shareth their parts, and
allotteth them what portions of meanes or forces he thinkes good.  How
knoweth he by the vertue of his understanding the inward and secret
motions of beasts?  By what comparison from them to us doth he
conclude the brutishnesse be ascribeth unto them? When I am playing
with my cat, who knowes whether she have more sport in dallying with
me than I have in gaming with her?  We entertaine one another with
mutuall apish trickes.  If I have my houre to begin or to refuse, so
hath she hers.  Plato in setting forth the golden age under Saturne,
amongst the chiefe advantages that man had then, reporteth the
communication he had with beasts, of whom enquiring and taking
instruction, he knew the true qualities and differences of every one
of them: by and from whom he got an absolute understanding and perfect
wisedome, whereby he led a happier life than we can doe.  Can we have
a better proofe to judge of mans impudency touching beasts?  This
notable author was of opinion that in, the greatest part of the
corporall forme which nature hath bestowed on them, she hath only
respected the use of the prognostications, which in his daies were
thereby gathered.  The defect which hindreth the communication
betweene them and us, why may it not as well be in us as in them?  It
is a matter of divination to guesse in whom the fault is that we
understand not one another.  For we understand them no more than they
us.  By the same reason, may they as well esteeme us beasts as we
them.  It is no great marvell if we understand them not: no more doe
we the Cornish, the Welch, or Irish. Yet have some boasted that they
understood them, as Apollonius Thyaneus, Melampus, Tiresias, Thales,
and others.  And if it be (as Cosmographers report that there are
nations who receive and admit a dogge to be their king, it must
necessarily follow that they give a certaine interpretation to his
voice and moving.  We must note the parity that is betweene us.  We
have some meane understanding of their senses, so have beasts of ours,
about the same measure.  They flatter and faune upon us, they threat
and entreat us, so doe we them.  Touching other matters, we manifestly
perceive that there is a full and perfect communication amongst them,
and that not only those of one same kinde understand one another, but
even such as are of different kindes.

  Et mutae pecudes, et denique secla ferarum

  Dissimilis fuerunt voces variasqe cluere,

  Cum metus aut dolor est, aut eum tam gaudia gliscunt./1

  Whole heard's (though dumbe) of beasts, both wild and tame,

  Use divers voices, diffrent sounds to frame,

  As joy, or griefe, or feare,

  Upspringing passions beare.

By one kinde of barking of a dogge, the horse knoweth he is angrie; by
another voice of his, he is nothing dismaid.  Even in beasts that have
no voice at all, by the reciprocall kindnesse which we see in them, we
easily inferre there is some other meane of entercommunication: their
jestures treat, and their motions discourse.

  Non alia longe ratione atque ipse videtur

  Protrahere ad gestum, pueros infantia lingua/2

  No otherwise, then for they cannot speake,

  Children are drawne by signes their mindes to breake.


And why not, as well as our dumbe men dispute, argue, and tell
histories by signes?  I have some so ready and so excellent in it,
that (in good sooth) they wanted nothing to have their meaning
perfectly understood.  Doe we not daily see lovers with the lookes and
rowling of their eyes, plainly show when they are angrie or pleased,
and how they entreat and thanke one another, assigne meetings, and
expresse any passion?

----- 1 LUCR. 1. v. 1069. 2 Ib. 1040.

  El silentio ancor suole

  Haver prieghi e parole.

  Silence also hath a way,

  Words and prayers to convay.

What doe we with our hands?  Doe we not sue and entreat, promise and
performe, call men unto us 'and discharge them, bid them farewell and
be gone, threaten, pray, beseech, deny, refuse, demand, admire,
number, confesse, repent, feare, bee ashamed, doubt, instruct,
command, incite, encourage, sweare, witnesse, accuse, condemne,
absolve, injurie, despise, defie, despight, flatter, applaud, blesse,
humble, mocke, reconcile, recommend, exalt, shew gladnesse, rejoyce,
complaine, waile, sorrow, discomfort, dispaire, cry out, forbid,
declare silence and astonishment: and what not? with so great
variation and amplifying as if they would contend with the tongue.
And with our head doe we not invite and and call to us, discharge and
send away, avow, disavow, honour, worship, disdaine, demand, direct,
rejoyce, affirme, deny, complaine, cherish, blandish, chide, yeeld,
submit, brag, boast, threaten, exhort, warrant, assure, and enquire?
What doe we with our eye- lids? and with our shoulders?  To conclude,
there is no motion nor jesture that doth not speake, and speakes in a
language very easie, and without any teaching to be understood: nay,
which is more, it is a language common and publike to all: whereby it
followeth (seeing the varietie and severall use it hath from others)
that this must rather he deemed the proper and peculiar speech of
humane nature.  I omit that which necessitie in time of need doth
particularly instruct and suddenly teach such as need it; and the
alphabets upon fingers, and grammars by jestures; and the sciences
which are onely exercised and expressed by them: and the nations
Plinie reporeth to have no other speech.  An Ambassador of the Citie
of Abdera, after he had talked a long time unto Agis, King of Sparta,
said thus unto him: 'O King, what answer wilt thou that I beare backe
unto our citizens? 'Thus (answered he) that I have suffered thee to
speake all thou wouldst, and as long as thou pleasedst, without ever
speaking one word.  Is not this a kind of speaking silence, and easie
to be understood?  And as for other matters; what sufficiency is there
in us that we must not acknowledge from the industry and labours of
beasts?  Can there be a more formall and better ordained policie,
divided into so severall charges and offices, more constantly
entertained, and better maintained, than that of Bees?  Shall we
imagine their so orderly disposing of their actions, and managing of
their vocations, have so proportioned and formall a conduct without
discourse, reason, and forecast?

  His quidam signis atque hoc exempla sequuti,

  Esse apibus partem divinae mentis, et haustus

  Aethereos doxere./1

  Some by these signes, by these examples moved,

  Said that in Bees there is and may be proved

  Some taste of heavenly kinde,

  Part of celestial minde.

The Swallowes which, at the approach of springtime, we see to pry, to
search, and ferret all the corners of our houses; is it without
judgement they seeke, or without discretion they chuse from out a
thousand places, that which is fittest for them to build their nest
andlodging?  And in that prety cunning contexture and admirable
framing of their houses, would birds rather fit themselves with a
round than a square figure, with an obtuse than a right angle, except
they knew both the commodities and effects of them?  Would they
(suppose you) first take water and then clay, unlesse they guessed
that the hardnesse of the one is softened by the moistnesse of the
other?  Would they floore their palace with mosse or downe, except
they foresaw that the tender parts of their young ones shall thereby
be more soft and easie?  Would they shroud and shelter themselves from
stormy weather, and build their cabbins towards the East,

----- 1 VIRG.  Geor. 1.  IV. 219.

unlesse they knew the different conditions of winds, and considered
that some are more healthfull and safe for them than some others?  Why
doth the Spider spin her artificiall web thicke in one place and thin
in another? And now useth one, and then another knot, except she had
an imaginary kinde of deliberation, fore-thought, and conclusion?  We
perceive by the greater part of their workes what excellency beasts
have over us, and how weake our art and short our cunning is, if we
goe about to imitate them.  We see, notwithstanding, even in our
grosest works, what faculties we employ in them, and how our minde
employeth the uttermost of her skill and forces in them: why should
wee not thinke as much of them?  Wherefore doe we attribute the workes
which excell whatever we can performe, either by nature or by art,
unto a kinde of unknowne, naturall, and servile inclination?  Wherein
unawares wee give them a great advantage over us, to infer that
nature, led by a certaine loving kindnesses leadeth and accompanieth
them (as it were by the hand) unto all the actions and commodities of
their life; and that she forsaketh and leaveth us to the hazard of
fortune; and by art to quest and finde out those things that are
behovefull and necessarie for our preservation: and therewithall
demeth us the meanes to attaine by any institution and contention of
spirit to the naturall sufficiency of brute beasts: So that their
brutish stupidity doth in all commodities exceed whatsoever our divine
intelligence can effect.  Verily, by this account, wee might have just
cause and great reason to terme her a most injust and partiall
step-dame: But there is no such thing, our policy is not so deformed
and disordered.  Nature hath generally imbraced all her creatures: And
there is not any but she hath amply stored with all necessary meanes
for the preservation of their being.  For the daily plaints, which I
often heare men (when the licence of their conceits doth sometimes
raise them above the clouds, and then headlong tumble them downe even
to the Antipodes), exclaiming that man is the onely forsaken and
out-cast creature, naked on the bare earth, fast bound and swathed,
having nothing to cover and arme himselfe withall but the spoile of
others; whereas Nature hath clad and mantled all other creatures, some
with shels, some with huskes, with rindes, with haire, with wooll,
with stings, with bristles, with hides, with mosse, with feathers,
with skales, with fleeces, and with silke, according as their quality
might need or their condition require: And hath fenced and armed them
with clawes, with talons, with hoofes, with teeth, with stings, and
with hornes, both to assaile others and to defend themselves: And hath
moreover instructed them in everything fit and requisite for them, as
to swim, to runne, to creepe, to flie, to roare, to bellow, and to
sing: whereas man only (Oh, silly, wretched man) can neither goe, nor
speake, nor shift, nor feed himselfe, unlesse it be to whine and weepe
onely, except hee bee taught.

  Tum porro, puer ut saevis projectus ab undis

  Navila, nudus humi, jacit infans indignus omni

  Vitali auxilio, cum primum in luminis oras

  Nexibus ex alvomatris natura profundit,

  Vagituque locum lugibri complet, et aequm est

  Cui tantum in vita restet transire malorum:

  At variae crescunt pecudes, armenta, feraeque,

  Nec crepitacula eis opus est, nec cuiquam adhibenda est

  Almae nutricis blanda atque infracta loquela:

  Nec varias quaerunt vestes pro tempore caeli:

  Denique non armis opus est, non maenibus altis

  Qeis sua tutentur quando omnibus omnia large

  Tellus ipsa parit, naturaque daedata rerum./1

  An infant, like a shipwracke ship-boy cast from seas,

  Lies naked on the ground and speechlesse, wanting all

  The helpes of vitall spirit, when nature with small ease

  Of throes, to see first light, from her wombe lets him fall,

  Then, as is meet, with mournfull cries he fils the place,

  For whom so many ils remaine in his lives race.

  But divers herds of tame and wild beasts foreward spring,

  Nor need they rattles, nor of Nurces cockring-kind


----- 1 LUCR. 1. v. 222.

  The flattering broken speech their lullaby need sing.

  Nor seeke they divers coats, as divers seasons bind.

  Lastly no armour need they, nor high-reared wall

  Whereby to guard their owne, since all things unto all

  Worke-master nature doth produce, And the earth largely to their
  use.


Such complaints are false.  There is a greater equality and more
  uniforme relation in the policy of the world.  Our skin is as
  sufficiently provided with hardnesse against the injuries of the
  weather as theirs.  Witnesse divers nations which yet never knew the
  use of clothes.  Our ancient Gaules were but slightly apparelled, no
  more are the Irish-men, our neighbours, in so cold a climate: which
  we may better judge by our selves, for all those parts of our bodie
  we are pleased to leave bare to winde and wether, are by experience
  found able to endure it.  If there were any weake part in us which
  in likely-hood should seeme to feare cold, it ought to be the
  stomacke, where digestion is made.  Our forefathers used to have it
  bare, and our ladies (as dainty-nice as they be) are many times
  seene to goe open-breasted, as low as their navill. The handles and
  swathes about our children are no more necessary: and the mothers of
  Lacedemonia brought up theirs in all liberty and loosenesse of
  moving their limbs without swathing or binding.  Our whining, our
  puling, and our weeping is common to most creatures, and divers of
  them are often seene to waile and grone a long time after their
  birth, forsomuch as it is a countenance fitting the weaknesse
  wherein they feele themselves.  As for the use of eating and
  feeding, it is in us, as in them, naturall and without teaching.
  Sentit enim vim quisque suam quam possit abuti./1

  For every one soone-understanding is

  Of his owne strength, which he may use amisse.

Who will make question that a child having attained the strength to
feed himselfe, could not quest for his meat and shift for his drinke?
The earth without

----- 1 LUCR. 1. v. 104.

labour or tilling doth sufficiently produce and offer him as much as
he shall need.  And if not at all times, no more doth she unto beasts;
witnesse the provision wee see the ants and other silly creatures to
make against the cold and barren seasons of the yeare.  The nations
that have lately bin discovered, so plenteously stored with all manner
of naturall meat and drinke, without care or labor, teach us that
bread is not our onely food: and that without toyling our common
mother nature hath with great plentie stored us with whatsoever should
be needfull for us, yea, as it is most likely, more richly and amply
than now adaies she doth, that we have added so much art unto it.

  Et tellus nitidas fruges vinetaque laeta

  Sponte sua primum mortalibus creavit,

  Ipsa dedit dulces foetus, et pabulaa laeta,

  Quae nunc vix nostro grandescunt aucta labore,

  Conterimusque boves et vires agricolarum:

  The earth it selfe at first of th' owne accord

  Did men rich Vineyards, and cleane fruit afford.

  It gave sweet of-springs, food from sweeter soyle

  Which yet scarse greater grow for all our toyle,

  Yet tire therein we doe,

  Both Plough-men's strength and Oxen too.

The gluttonous excesse and intemperate lavishnesse of our appetite
exceeding all the inventions we endevour to finde out wherewith to
glut and cloy the same.  As for armes and weapons, we have more that
be naturall unto us than the greatest part of other beasts.  We have
more severall motions of limbs, and naturally without reaching: we
reape more serviceable nse of them than they doe.  Those which are
trained up to fight naked, are seene head long to cast themselves into
the same hazards and dangers as we doe.  If some beasts excell us in
this advantage, we exceed many others: and the industrie to enable the
skill to fortifie and the wit to shelter and cover our body by
artificiall meanes, we have it by a kinde of naturall intinct and
teaching.  Which to prove, the elephant doth whet and sharpen his
teeth

----- 1 LUCR. 1. ii. 1166.

he useth in warre (for he hath some he only useth for that purpose)
which he heedfully spareth and never puts them to other service: When
buls prepare themselves to fight, and they raise, scatter, and with
their feet cast the dust about them: the wilde boare whets his tusks;
when the Ichneumon is to grapple with the crocodile, he walloweth his
body in the mire, then lets the same drie and harden upon him, which
he doth so often that at last the same becomes as hard and tough as
well as any compact crust, which serveth him in stead of a cuirace.
Why shall we not say that it is as naturall for us to arme our selves
with wood and yron?  As for speech, sure it is that if it be not
naturall it is not necessary.  I beleeve, neverthelesse, that if a
childe, bred in some uncouth solitarinesse, farre from haunt of people
(though it were a hard matter to make triall of it) would no doubt
have some kinde of words to expresse, and speech to utter his
conceits. And it is not to be imagined that nature hath refused us
that meane and barred us that helpe which she hath bestowed upon many
and divers other creatures: for what is that faculty we see in them
when they seeme to complaine, to rejoice, to call one unto another for
helpe, and bid one another to loving conjunction (as commonly they
doe) by the use of their voice, but a kind of speech?  And shall not
they speake among themselves that speake and utter their minde unto us
and we to them?  How many waies speake we unto our dogges, and they
seeme to understand and answer us?  With another language and with
other names speake we unto and call them than we doe our birds, our
hogges, our oxen, our horses, and such like; and according to their
different kindes we change our idiome.

  Cosi per entro loco schiera bruna

  S'ammusa l'una con I'altra formica,

  Forse a spiar lor via, et lor fortuna./1


----- 1 DANTE.  Purgatorio, xxvi. 84.

  So Ants amidst their sable-coloured band

  One with another mouth to mouth confer,

  Haply their way, or state to understand.

Me seemeth that Lactantius/1 doth not onely attribute speech unto
beasts, but also laughing.  And the same difference of tongue, which
according to the diversitie of countries is found amongst us, is also
found amongst beasts of one same kinde.  Aristotle to that purpose
alleageth the divers calles or purres of partriges, according to the
situation of their place of breeding.

  ----- variaeque volucres

  Longe alias alio jaciunt in temepore voces,


  Et partim mutant cum tempestatibus una

  Raucisonos cantus./2

  And divers birds, send forth much divers sounde

  At divers times, and partly change the grounds

  Of their hoarce-sounding song,

  As seasons change along.

But it would be knowne what language such a child should speake, and
what some report by divination hath no great likelyhood. And if
against this opinion a man would alleage unto me that such as are
naturally deafe, speake not at all: I answer that it is not onely
because they could not receive the instruction of the world by their
eares, but rather inasmuch as the sense of hearing, whereof they are
deprived, hath some affinity with that of speaking, both which with a
naturall kinde of ligament or seame hold and are fastned together.  In
such sort as what we speake we must first speake it unto our selves,
and before we utter and send the same forth to strangers we make it
inwardly to sound unto our eares.  I have said all this to maintaine
the coherency and resemblance that is in all humane things, and to
bring us unto the generall throng. We are neither above nor under the
rest: what ever is under the coape of heaven (saith the wise man)
runneth one law, and followeth one fortune.

  Indupedita suis fatalibus omnia vinclis./3

  All things enfolded are,

  In fatall bonds as fits their share. {Pope+}


----- 1 Instit.  Divin. 1. iii. c. 10. 2 LUCR. 1.  V. 1088. 3
Ibid. 885.

Some difference there is, there are orders and degrees; but all is
under the visage of one same nature,

  ----- res quaque suo ritu procedit, et omnes

  Faedere natura certo discrimina servant./1

  All things proceed in their course, natures all

  Keeps difference, as in their league doth fall.

Man must be forced and marshalled within the lists of this policie.
Miserable man, with all his wit, cannot in effect goe beyond it: he is
embraced and engaged, and as other creatures of his ranke are, he is
subjected in like bond, and without any prerogative or essentiall
pre-excellenceie; and what ever privilege he assume unto himselfe, he
is of very meane condition.{Yahoo+} That which is given by opinion or
fantasie hath neither body nor taste.  And if it be so that he alone,
above all other creatures, hath this liberty of imagination and this
licence of thoughts which represent unto him both what:is and what is
not, and what him pleaseth, falsehood and truth; it is an advantage
bought at a very high rate, and whereof he hath little reason to
glorie: for thence springs the chiefest source of all the mischiefs
that oppresse him, as sinne, sicknesse, irresolution, trouble and
despaire.  But to come to my purpose, I say therefore, there is no
likelyhood, we should imagine, the beasts doe the very same things by
a naturall inclination and forced genuitie, which we doe of our
freewil and industrie.  Of the very same effects we must conclude
alike faculties, and by the richest effects infer the noblest
faculites, and consequently acknowledge that the same discourse and
way we hold in working, the very same, or perhaps some other better,
doe beasts hold.  Wherefore shall we imagine that naturall compulsion
in them, that prove no such effect our selves?  Since it is more
honourable to be addressed to act, and tyed to worke orderly, by and
through a natural and unavoideable condition and most approching to
Divinitie, than regularly to worke and act by and through a casuall
and rash libertie; and

----- 1 LUCR. 1. v. 932.

it is safer to leave the reignes of our conduct unto nature than unto
ourselves.  The vanitie of our presumption maketh us rather to be
beholding and as it were endebted unto our owne strength, {Shylock+}
{Antonio] for our sufficiency, than unto her liberalitie; and we
enrich other creatures with naturall gifts, and yeeld those unto them,
that so we may ennoble and Honour our selves with gifts purchased, as
me thinketh, by a very simple humour: for I would prize graces and
value gifts that were altogether mine owne, and naturall unto me, as
much as I would those I had begged, and, with a long prentiship,
shifted for.  It lyeth not in our power to obtaine a greater
commendation than to be favoured both of God and Nature.  By that
reason, the fox, which the inhabitants of Thrace use when they will
attempt to march upon the yce of some frozen river, and to that end
let her go loose afore them, should we see her running alongst the
river side, approch her eare close to the yce, to listen whether by
any farre or neere distance she may heare the noyse or roaring of the
water running under the same, and according as she perceiveth the yce
thereby to be thicke or thinne, to goe either forward or backward;
might not we lawfuify judge that the same discourse possesseth her
head as in like case it would ours?  And that it is a kinde of
debating reason and consequence drawen from naturall sense? Whatsoever
maketh a noyse moveth, whatsoever moveth is not frozen, whatsoever is
not frozen is liquid, whatsoever is liquid yeelds under any weight?
For to impute that only to a quicknesse of the sense of hearing,
without discourse or consequence, is but a fond conceipt, and cannot
enter into my imagination.  The like must be judged of so many wiles
and inventions wherewith beasts save themselves from the snares and
scape the baits we lay to entrap them.  And if we will take hold of
any advantage tending to that purpose, that it is in our power to
seize upon them, to employ them to our service, and to use them at our
pleasure; it is but the same oddes we have one upon another.  To which
purpose we have our slaves or bond-men; and were not the Climacides
certain women in Syria, which creeping on al foure upon the ground,
served the ladies in steed of footstoles or ladders to get up into
their coachs?  Where the greater part of free men, for very slight
causes, abandon both their life and being to the power of others.  The
wives and concubines of the Thracians strive and contend which of them
shal be chosen to bee slaine over her husbands or lovers tombe.  Have
tyrants ever failed to find many men vowed to their devotion? Where
some for an overplus or supererogation have added this necessity, that
they must necessarily accompany them as well in death as in
life. Whole hostes of men have thus tyed themselves unto their
captaines.  The tenor of the oath ministred unto the schollars that
entered and were admitted the rude schoole of Roman Gladiators emplied
these promises, which was this: we vow and sweare to suffer our selves
to be enchained, beaten, burned, and killed with the sword, and endure
whatsoever any lawfull fenser ought to endure for his master: most
religiously engaging both our bodie and soule to the use of his
service:

  Ure meum, si vis, flamma caput et pete ferro

  Corpus, et intorto verbere terga seca,/1

  Burne tyrant (if thou wilt my head with fire, with sword

  My body strike, my backe cut with hard-twisted cord.

Was not this a very strict covenant?  Yet were there some yeares ten
thousand found that entered and lost themselves in those
schooles. {death+} When the Scithians buried their king, they
strangled over his dead body first the chiefest and best beloved of
his concubines, then his cup-bearer, the master of his horse, his
chamberlains, the usher of his chamber, and his master cooke.  And in
his anniversary killed fiftie horse, mounted with fifty pages, whom
before they had slaine with thrusting sharpe stakes into their
fundament, which, going up along their chine-bone, came out at their
throat; whom thus mounted; they set in

----- 1 TIBUL. 1. i.  El. ix. 21.

orderly rankes about the tombe.  The men that serve us doe it better
cheape, and for a lesse curious and favourable entreating than we use
unto birds, unto horses, and unto dogges.  What carke and toile apply
we not ourselves unto for their sakes?  Me thinks the vilest and
basest servants will never doe that so willingly for their masters
which princes are glad to doe for their beasts.  Diogenes, seeing his
kinsfolks to take care how they might redeeme him out of thraldome;
'they are fooles,' said he, 'for it is my master that governeth,
keepeth, feedeih, and serveth me:' And such as keepe or entertaine
beasts may rather say they serve them than that they are served of
them. {service+} And yet they have that naturall greater magnanimity,
that never lyon was seen to subject bimselfe unto another lyon, nor
one horse unto another horse, for want of heart.  As wee hunt after
beasts, so tygers and lyons hunt after men, and have a like exercise
one upon another: hounds over the hare; the pike or luce over the
tench; the swallowes over the grasse- hoppers) and the sparrow-hawkes
over blacke-birds and larkes.

  ----- serpente ciconia pullos

  Nutrit, et inventa per devia rura lacerta,

  Et leporem aut capream famulae Iovis, et generosae

  In saltu venantur aves./1

  The storke her young feeds with serpents prey,

  And lyzarts found somewhere out of the way,

  Joves servants - Eagles, hawkes of noblera kynde,

  In forrests hunt, a hare or kid to finde,

We share the fruits of our prey with our dogges and hawkes, as a meed
of their paine and reward of their industry.  As about Amphipolis, in
Thrace, faulkners and wilde hawks divide their game equally: and as
about the Maeotid fennes, if fishers doe not very honestly leave
behind them an even share of their fishings for the woolves that range
about those coasts, they presently run and teare their nets.  And as
we have a kinde of fishing rather managed by sleight than strength,

----- 1 JUV.  Sat. xiv. 74.

As that of hooke and line about our angling-rods, so have beasts
amongst themselves.  Aristotle reporteth that the cuttle-fish casteth
a long gut out of her throat, which like a line she sendeth forth, and
at her pleasure pulleth it in againe, according as she perceiveth some
little fish come neere her, who being close hidden in the gravell or
stronde, letteth him nible or bite the end of it, and then by little
and little drawes it in unto her, untill the fish be so neere that,
with a soudaine leape, she may catch it.  Touching strength, there is
no creature in the world open to so many wrongs and injuries as man:
we need not a whale, an elephant, nor a crocodile, nor any such other
wilde beast, of which one alone is of power to defeat a great number
of men; seely lice are able to make Silla give over his Dictatorship:
the heart and life of a mighty and triumphant emperor is but the
break-fast of a seely little worme.  Why say we that skill to discerne
and knowledge to make choyce (gotten by art and acquired by discourse)
of things good for this life, and availfull against sicknesse, and to
distinguish of those which are hurtfull, and to know the vertue of
reubarb, qualitie of oake ferne and operation of polipodie, is only
peculiar unto man?  When we see the Goats of Candia being shot with an
arrow to choose from out a million of simples the herb Dittany or
Garden-ginger, and there-with cure themselves; and the Tortoise having
eaten of a Viper immediately to seek for Origon or wild Marjoram to
purge herselfe: the Dragon to run and cleare his eies with Fenel:
Cranes with their bils to minister glisters of sea-water unto
themselves; the Elephants to pull out, not only from themselves and
their fellowes, but also from their masters (witnesse that of King
Porus, whom Alexander defeated) such javelins or darts as in fight
have beene hurled or shot at them, so nimbly and so cunningly as
ourselves could never do it so easily and with so little paine: Why
say wee not likewise that that is science and prudence in them?  For,
if to depress them some would alleage it is by the onely instruction
and instinct of Nature they know it, that will not take the name of
science and title of prudence from them; it is rather to ascribe it
unto them than unto us for the honour of so assured a schoole-mistris.
Chrysippus, albeit in other things as disdainfull a judge of the
condition of beasts as any other Philosopher, considering the earliest
movings of the dog, who comming into a path that led three severall
wayes in search or quest of his Master, whom he had lost, or in
pursuit of some prey that hath escaped him, goeth senting first one
way and then another, and having assured himself of two, because he
findeth not the tracke of what he hunteth for, without more adoe
furiously betakes himselfe to the third; he is enforced to confesse
that such a dog must necessarily discourse thus with himselfe, 'I have
followed my Masters footing hitherto, hee must of necessity pass by
one of these three wayes; it is neither this nor that, then
consequently hee is gone this other. And by this conclusion or
discourse assuming him selfe, comming to the third path, hee useth his
sense no more, nor sounds it any longer, but by the power of reason
suffers himselfe violently to be carried through it.  This meere
logicall tricke, and this use of divided and conjoyned. propositions,
and of the sufficient numbring of parts: is it not as good that the
dog know it by him selfe, as by Trapezuntius his logicke?  Yet are not
beasts altogether unapt to be instructed after our manner.  We teach
Blacke-birds, Starlins, Ravens, Piots, and Parots to chat; and that
facilitie we perceive in them to lend us their voyce so supple and
their wind so tractable, that so wee may frame and bring it to a
certaine number of letters and silables, witnesseth they have a kinds
of inward reason which makes them so docile and willing to learne.  I
thinke every man is cloied and wearied with seeing so many apish and
mimmike trickes that juglers teach their Dogges, as the dances, where
they misse not one cadence of the sounds or notes they heare: Marke
but the divers turnings and severall kinds of motions which by the
commandement of their bare words they make them performe: But I wonder
not a little at the effect, which is ordinary amongst us; and that is,
the dogs which blind men' use, both in Citie and in Country: I have
observed how sodainly they will stop when they come before some doores
where they are wont to receive alms: how carefully they will avoyd the
shocke of Carts and Coaches, even when they have roome enough to passe
by themselves.  I have seene some going along a Towne-ditch leave a
plaine and even path and take a worse, that so they might draw their
Master from the ditch. How could a man make the dog conceive his
charge was only to looke to his masters safetie, and for his service
to despise his own commoditie and good?  And how should he have the
knowledge that such a path would be broade enough for him, but not for
a blind man?  Can all this he conceived without reason?  We must not
forget what Plutarke affirmeth to have seene a dog in Rome doe before
the Emperour Vespasian the father in the Theatre of Marcellus.  This
Dog served a jugler, who was to play a fiction of many faces and
sundry countenances, where he also was to act a part.  Amongst other
things he was for a long while to counterfeit and faine himself dead,
because he had eaten of a certain drugge: having swallowed a piece of
bread, which was supposed to be the drug, he began sodainly to stagger
and shake as if he had beene giddie, then stretching and laying
himselfe along as stiffe as if hee were starke dead, suffered himself
to be dragged and haled from one place to another, according to the
subject and plot of the play, and when he knew his time, first he
began faire and softly to stirre as if he were roused out of a dead
slumber, then lifting up his head hee looked and stared so gastly that
all the bystanders were amazed.  The Oxen, which in the Kings gardens
of Susa were taught to water them and to draw water out of deepe
wells, turned certaine great wheeles, to which were fastned great
buckets (as in many places of Languedoke is commonly seene) and being
every one appointed to draw just a hundred turnes a day, they were so
accustomed to that number as it was impossible by any compulsion to
make them draw one more, which taske ended they would suddenly stop.
We are growne striplings before we can tell a hundred; and many
nations have lately beene discovered that never knew what numbers
meant.  More discourse is required to teach others than to be taught.
And omitting what Democritus judged and proved, which is, that beasts
have instructed us in most of our Arts: As the Spider to weave and
sew, the Swallow to build, the Swan and the Nightingale musicke, and
divers beasts, by imitating them, the art of Physicke: Aristotle is of
opinion that Nightingales teach their young ones to sing, wherein they
employ both long time and much care: whence it followeth that those
which we keepe tame in cages and have not had leasure to go to their
parents schoole, lose much grace in their singing.  Whereby we may
conclude they are much amended by discipline and study.  And amongst
those that run wilde, their song is not all one nor alike.  Each one
hath learnt either better or worse, according to his capacity.  And so
jealous are they in their prentiseship, that to excell one another
they will so stoutly contend for the mastery that many times such as
are vanquished die; their winde and strength sooner failing than their
voice.  The young ones wil very sadly sit recording their lesson, and
are often seene labouring how to imitate certaine song-notes: The
Scholler listeneth attentively to his Masters lesson, and carefully
yeeldeth account of it; now one and then another shall hold his peace:
Marke but how they endevour to amend their faults, and how the elder
striveth to reprove the youngest.  Arrius protesteth to have seene an
Elephant who on every thigh had a cimball hanging and one fastned to
his truncke, at the sound of which all other Elephants danced in a
round, now rising aloft, then lowting full low at certaine cadences,
even as the instrument directed them, and was much delighted with the
harmony.  In the great showes of Rome Elephants were ordinarily seene,
taught to move and dance at the sound of a voice, certaine dances,
wherein were many strange shifts, enterchanges, caprings, and
cadences, very hard to be learned.  Some have beene noted to konne and
practise their lessons, using much study and care, as being loath to
be chidden and beaten of their masters.  But the tale of the piot is
very strange, which Plutarke confidently witnesseth to have seene:
'This jay was in a Barbers shop of Rome, and was admirable in
counterfeiting with her voice whatsoever she heard: It fortuned one
day that certaine Trumpeters staied before this shop and there sounded
a good while; and being gone, all that day and the next after the piot
began to be very sad, silent, and melancholy, whereat all men
marvelled, and surmized that the noise or clang of the trumpets had
thus affrighted and dizzied her, and that with her hearing she had
also lost her voice. But at last they found she was but in a deep
study and dumpish, retracting into herself, exercising her minde, and
preparing her voice to represent the sound, and expresse the noise of
the Trumpets she had heard.  And the first voice she uttered was that
wherein she perfectly expressed their straines, their closes, and
their changes: having by her new prentiship altogether quit, and as it
were scorned whatever she could prattle before. I will not omit to
alleage another example of a Dogge, which Plutarke also saith to have
seen (as for any order or method I know very well I do but confound
it, which I observe no more in ranging these examples than I doe in
all the rest of my business), who being in a ship, noted that his
Dogge was in great perplexity how to get some Oyle out of a deepe
Pitcher, which by reason of its narrow mouth he could not reach with
his tongue, got him presently some Pibble stones, and put so many into
the jarre that he made the Oyle come up so neare the brimme as he
could easily reach and licke some.  And what is that but the effect of
a very subtill spirit?  It is reported that the ravens of Barbary will
doe the like, when the water they would drinke is too low.  This
action doth somewhat resemble that which Juba, a King of that Nation,
relateth of their elephants; that when through the wiles of those that
chase them, anyone chanceth to fall into certaine deep pits which they
prepare for them, and to deceive them they cover over with reeds,
shrubs, and boughes, his fellowes will speedily with all diligence
bring great store of stones and peeces of timber that so they may
helpe to recover him out againe.  But this beast hath in many other
effects such affinity with man's sufficiency, that would I
particularly trace out what experience hath taught, I should easily
get an affirmation of what I so ordinarily maintaine, which is, that
there is more difference found betweene such and such a man, than
betweene such a beast and such a man.  An Elephants keeper in a
private house of Syria was wont every meale to steele away halfe of
the allowance which was allotted him; it fortuned on a day his master
would needs feed him himselfe, and having poured that just measure of
barley which for his allowance he had prescribed for him, into his
manger, the elephant, sternely eying his master, with his truncke
divided the provender in two equal parts, and laid the one aside, by
which he declared the wrong his keeper did him.  Another having a
keeper, who to encrease the measure of his provender was wont to
mingle stones with it, came one day to the pot which with meat in it
for his keepers dinner was seething over the fire, and filled it up
with ashes.  These are but particular effects, but that which all the
world hath seene, and all men know, which is, that in all the armies
that came out of the East, their chiefest strength consisted in their
elephants, by whom they reaped, without comparison, farre greater
effects than now adaies we do by our great ordnance, which in a manner
holds their place in a ranged battel (such as have any knowledge in
ancient histories may easily guesse it to be true).

  -----si quidem Tyrio servire solebant

  Anibali, et nostris ducibus, regique Molosso


  Horum majores, et dorso ferre cohortes,

  Partem aliquam belli, et euntem in praelia surriam./1


----- 1 JUV.  Sat. xii. 107.

  Their elders usde great Hannibal to steed

  Our Leaders, and Molossian Kings at need,

  And on their backe to beare strong guarding Knights,

  Part of the warre, and troupes addrest to fights.

A man must needs rest assured of the confidence they had in these
beasts, and of their discourse, yeelding the front of a battel unto
them; where the least stay they could have made, by reason of their
hugenesse and weight of their bodies, and the least amazement that
might have made them turne head upon their owne men, had bin
sufficient to lose all.  And few examples have been noted that ever it
fortuned they turned upon their owns troupes, whereas we head-long
throng one upon another, and so are put to rout.  They had charge
given them, not onely of one simple moving, but of many and severall
parts in the combat.  As the Spaniards+ did to their dogges in their
new conquest_of_the_Indias+, to whom they gave wages and imparted
their booties, which beasts shewed as much dexteritie in pursuing and
judgement in staying their victorie, in charging or retreating, and,
as occasion served, in distinguishing their friends from their
enemies, as they did earnestnesse and eagerness.  We rather admire and
consider strange than common things, without which I should never so
long have ammused my selfe about this tedious catalogue.  For, in my
judgement, he that shall meerly check what we ordinarily see in those
beasts that live amongst us shall in them flnde as wonderful effects
as those which with so much toile are collected in far countries and
passed ages.  It is one same nature which still doth keepe her course.
He that throughly should judge her present estate might safely
conclude both what shall happen and what is past.  I have seen amongst
us men brought by sea from distant countries, whose language, because
we could in no wise understand, and that their fashions, their
countenance, and their clothes did altogether differ from ours, who of
us did not deem them brutish and savage+?  Who did not impute their
mutenesse into stupiditie or beastlines, and to see them ignorant of
the French tongue, of our kissing the hands, of our low-lowting
courtesies, of our behaviour and carriage, by which without
contradiction, humane nature ought to take her patterne?  Whatsoever
seemeth strange unto us, and we understand not, we blame and
condemne. {otherphobia+} The like befalleth us in our judging of
beasts.  They have diverse qualities, which somewhat simbolize witih
ours, from which we may comparatively draw some conjecture, but of
such as are peculiar unto them what know we what they are?  Horses,
dogges, oxen, sheepe, birds, and the greater number of sensitive
creatures that live amongst us, know our voyce, and by it suffer
themselves to be directed.  So did the lamprey which Crassus had, and
came to him when he called it: so do the eeles that breed in
Arethusa's fountains.  And my selfe have seene some fish-ponds where
at a certaine crie of those that kept them, the fish would presently
come to shoare, where they were wont to be fed.  ----- nomen habent,
et ad magistri Vocem quisque sui venit citatus./1


  They have their proper Dames, and every one

  Comes at his master's voyce, as call'd upon.


By which we may judge and conclude that elephants have some
apprehension of religion, forsomuch as after diverse washings and
purificttions, they are seene to lift up their truncke as we doe our
armes, and at certaine houres of the day, without any instruction, of
their owne accord, holding their eyes fixed towards the sunne-rising,
fall into a long meditating contemplation; yet, because we see no such
appearance in other beasts, may wee rightly conclude that they are
altogether void of religion, and may not take that ill payment which
is hidden from us. As we perceive something in that action which the
Philosopher Cleanthes well observed, because it somewhat draws neere
unto ours.  He saw (as himselfe reporteth) a company of emmets goe
from their nest, hearing amongst them the body of a dead

----- 1 MART. 1. iv.  Epig.  XXX. 6.

ant, toward another emmets nest, from which many other ants came, as
it were to meet them by the way to parly with them, who after they had
continued together awhile, they which came last, returned backe to
consult (as you may imagine) with their fellow-citizens, and because
they could hardly come to any capitulation, they made two or three
voyages to and fro.  In the end, the last come brought unto the other
a worme from their habitation, as for a ransome of the dead, which
worme the first company tooke upon their backes, and carried it home,
leaving the dead body unto the other.  Loe, here the interpretation
that Cleanthes gave it: Witnessing thereby that those creatures which
have no voice at all, have neverthelesse mutual commerce and
enterchangeable communication, whereof if we be not partakers, it is
onely our fault; and therefore doe we fondly to censure it.  And they
yet produce divers other effects, farre surpassing our capacity, and
so farre out of the reach of our mutation that even our thoughts are
unable to conceive them.  Many hold opinion that in the last and
famous sea-fight which Antonie lost against Augustus, his
admiral-galley was in her course staied by that little fish the
Latines call Remora, and the English a Suck-stone, whose property is
to stay any ship he can fasten himselfe unto.  And the Emperour
Caligula, sailing with a great fleet along the coast of Romania, his
owne galley was suddenly staied by such a fish, which he caused to be
taken sticking fast to the keele, moodily raging that so little a
creature had the power to force both sea and winde, and the violence
of all his oares, onely with her bil sticking to his galley (for it is
a kinde of shellfish) and was much more amazed when he perceived the
fish being brought aboord his ship to have no longer that powerfull
vertue which it had being in the sea.  A certaine citizen of Cyzicum,
whilom purchased unto himselfe the reputation to be an excellent
mathematician, because he had learnt the quality of the hedge-hogge,
whose property is to build his hole or denne open diverse waies, and
toward severall winds, and fore-seeing rising stormes, he presently
stoppeth the holes that way, which thing the foresad citizen heedfully
observing, would in the City foretell any future storm, and what wind
should blow.  The cameleon taketh the colour of the place wherein he
is.  The fish called a pourcontrell, or manie-feet, changeth him selfe
into what colour he lists as occasion offereth it selfe, that so he
may hide himselfe from what he feareth, and catch what he seeketh for.
In the cameleon it is a change preceding of passion, but in the
pourcontrell a change in action; we ourselves doe often change our
colour and alter our countenance through sudden feare, choler, shame,
and such like violent passions, which are wont to alter the hew of our
faces, but it is by the effect of sufferance, as in the cameleon. The
jaundise hath power to make us yelow, but it is not in the disposition
of our wils.  The effects we perceive in other creatures, greater than
ours, witnesse some more excellent faculty in them, which is concealed
from us; as it is to be supposed diverse others of their conditions
and forces are, whereof no appearance or knowledge commeth to us.  Of
all former predictions, the ancientest and most certaine were such as
were drawen from the flight of birds; we have nothing equall unto it,
nor so admirable.  The rule of fluttering, and order of shaking their
wings, by which they conjecture the consequences of things to ensue,
must necessarily be directed to so noble an operation by some
excellent and supernaturall meane.  For it is a wresting of the letter
to attribute so wondrous effects to any naturall decree, without the
knowledge, consent, or discourse of him that causeth and produceth
them, and is a most false opinion, which to prove, the torpedo or
cramp-fish hath the property to benumme and astonish, not onely the
limbs of those that touch it, but also theirs that with any long pole
or fishing line touch any part thereof, shee doth transmit and convey
a kinde If heavie numming into the hands of those that stirre or
handle the same. Moreover, it is averred that if any matter be cast
upon them the astonishment is sensibly felt to gaine upward, untill it
come to the hands, and even through the water it astonisheth the
feeling-sence. Is not this a wonderfull power?  Yet is it not
altogether unprofitable for the Cramp-fish, she both knowes and makes
use of it: for to catch prey she pursueth, she is seene to hide
berselfe under the mud, that, other fishes swimming over her, strucken
and benummed with her exceeding coldnesse, may fall into her clawes.
The Cranes, swallowes, and other wandering birds, changing their abode
according to the seasons of the years, shew evidently the knowledge
they have of their fore-divining faculty, and often put the same in
use.  Hunters assure us that to chose the best dog, and which they
purpose to keepe from out a litter of other young whelps, there is no
better meane than the damme herselfe: for, if they be removed from out
their kennell, him that she first brings thither againe shall alwaies
prove the best; or if one but encompasse her kennell with fire, looke
which of her whelps she first seeketh to save, is undoubtedly the
best; whereby it appeareth they have a certaine use of prognosticating
that we have not; or else some hidden vertue to judge of their young
ones, different and more lively than ours.  The manner of all beasts
breeding, engendering, nourishing, working, moving, living, and dying,
being so neere to ours, what ever we abridge from their moving causes,
and adde to our condition above theirs can no way depart from our
reasons discourse.  For a regiment of our health, Physitians propose
the example of bats manner of life and proceeding unto us: for this
common saying is alwaies in the people's mouth:

  Tenez chauds les pieds et la teste,

  Au demeurant vivez en beste./1

  Keep warme ('tis meete) the head and feete:

  In all the rest, live like a beast.

  Generation is the chiefest naturall action: we have


----- 1 JOUB.  Err Pop. ii. 140.

a certaine disposition of some members fittest for that purpose;
nevertheless, they bid us range our selves unto a brutish situation
and disposition, as most effectuall:

  ----- more ferarum,

  Quadrupedumque maqis ritu, plerumque putantur


  Concipere uxores: quia sic loca sumere possunt,

  Pectoribus positis, sublatis semina lumbis./1

And reject those indiscreet and insolent motions which women have so
luxuriously found out, as hurtfull: conforming them to the example and
use of beasts of their sex, as more modest and considerate.

  Nam mulier prohibet se concipere, atgue repugnat,

  Clunibus ipse viri Venerem si laeta retractet,

  Atque exposato ciet omni pectore fluctus,

  Et enim sulci recta regione viaque

  Vomerem, atque locis avertit seminis ictum./2


If it be justice to give every one his due, beasts which serve, love,
and defend their benefactors, pursue and outrage strangers, and such
as offend them, by so doing they represent some shew of our justice,
as also in reserving a high kinde of equality in dispensing of what
they have to their young ones.  Touching friendship, without all
comparison, they professe it more lively and shew it more constantly
than men.  Hircanus, a dog of Lysimachus the King, his master being
dead, without eating or drinking, would never come from off his bed,
and when the dead corps was removed thence he followed it, and lastly
flung himself into the fire where his master was burned. As did also
the dogge of one called Pyrrhus, who after he was dead would never
budge from his masters couch, and when he was removed suffered
himselfe to be carried away with him, and at last flung himselfe into
the fire wherein his master was consumed.  There are certaine
inclinations of affection which, without counsell of reason, arise
sometimes in us, proceeding of a casuall temerity, which some call
sympathie: beasts as wel as men are ----- 1 LUCR. 1. iv. 1256. 2
LUCR. 1. iv. 1260.

capable of it.  We see horses take a kinde of acquaintancee one of
another, so that often, traveling by the highway or feeding together,
we have much ado to keep them asunder; wee see them bend and applie
their affections to some of their fellowes colours, as if it were upon
a certaine visage: and when they meet with any such, with signes of
joy and demonstration of good will to joine and accost them, and to
hate and shunne some other formes and colours.  Beasts as well as wee
have choice in their loves, and are very nice in chusing of their
mates.  They are not altogether void of our extreme and unappeasable
jealousies.  Lustfull desires are either naturall and necessary as
eating and drinking; or else naturall and not necessary, as the
acquaintance of males and females; or else neither necessary nor
naturall: of this last kinde are almost all mens, for they are all
superfluous and artificiall.  It is wonderfull to see with how little
nature will be satisfied, and how little she hath left for us to be
desired.  The preparations in our kitchens doe nothing at al concede
her lawes.  The Stoikes say that a man might very well sustaine
himselfe with one olive a day.  The delicacy of our wines is no part
of her lesson, no more is the surcharge and relishing which we adde
unto our letcherous appetites.

  -----neque illa

  Magno prognatum deposcit console cunnum./1


These strange lustfull longings which the ignorance of good, and a
false opinion, have possest us with, are in number so infinite that in
a manner they expell all those which are naturall, even as if there
were so many strangers in a city that should either banish and expell
all the naturall inhabitants thereof, or utterly suppresse their
ancient power and authority, and absolutely usurping the same, take
possession of it.  Brute beastes are much more regulare than we, and
with more moderation containe themselves within the compasse which
nature hath prescribed them; but not so exactly

----- 1 HOR. 1. i.  Sat. ii. 30.

but that they have some coherency with our riotous
licenciousnesse. And even as there have beene found, certaine furious
longings and unnaturall desires which have provoked men unto the love
of beasts, so have diverse times some of them beene drawn to love us,
and are possessed with monstrous affections from one kind to another:
witnesse the elephant that in the love of an herb-wife, in the city of
Alexandria, was corivall with Aristophanes the Grammarian, who in all
offices pertayning to an earnest woer and passionate suiter yeelded
nothing unto him; for, walking thorow the fruit-market, he would here
and there snatch up some with his truncke, and carry them unto her: as
neere as might be he would never loose the sight of her, and now and
then over her hand put his truncke into her bosome, to feele her
breasts.  They also report of a dragon that was exceedingly in love
with a young maiden, and of a goose in the city of Asope which dearely
loved a young childe; also of a ram that belonged to the musitian
Glausia.  Do we not daily see munkies ragingly in love with women, and
furiously to pursue them?  And certaine other beasts given to love the
males of their owns sex?  Oppianus and others report some examples to
show the reverence and manifest the awe some beasts in their marriages
beare unto their kindred; but experience makes us often see the
contrary:

  -----nec habetur turpe juvencae

  Ferre patrem tergo: tua filia coniux:

  Quasque creavit, init pecudes caper: ipsaque cuius

  Semine concepta est, ex illo conecepit ales/1

  To beare her Sire the Heifer shameth not:

  The Horse takes his owne Fillies maiden-head:

  The Goat gets them with young whom he begot:

  Birds bred by them, by whom themselves were bred.

Touching a subtil pranke and witty tricke, is there any so famous as
that of Thales the philosopher's mule, which, laden with salt, passing
thorow a river chanced

----- 1 OVID.  Metam. 1. x. 325.

to stumble, so that the sacks she carried were all wet, and perceiving
the salt (because the water had melted it to grow lighter, ceased not,
as seene as she came neere any water, together with her load, to
plunge herselfe therein, untill her master, being aware of her craft,
commanded her to be laden with wooll, which being wet became heavier;
the mule finding herselfe deceived, used her former policy no more.
There are many of them that lively represent the visage of our
avarice, who with a greedy kinde of desire endevour to surprise
whatsoever comes within their reach, and though they reap no
commodity, nor have any use of it, to hide the same very curiously.
As for husbandry, they exceed us, not onely in fore-sight to spare and
gather together for times to come, but have also many parts of the
skill belonging thereunto.  As the ants, when they perceive their
corne to grow mustie and graine to be sowre, for feare it should rut
and putrifie, spread the same abroad before their nests, that so it
may aire and drie.  But the caution they use in gnawing, and
prevention they employ in paring their graines of wheat, is beyond all
imagination of mans wit: Because wheat doth not alwaies keep drie nor
wholesome, but moisten, melt, and dissolve into a kind of whey,
namely, when it beginneth to bud, fearing it should turne to seed, and
lose the nature of a storehouse, for their sustenance, the part and
gnaw off the end whereat it wonts to bud.  As forwarre+, which is the
greatest and most glorious of all humane actions, I would faine know
if we will use it for an argument of some prerogative, or otherwise
for a testimonie of our imbecilitie and imperfection, as in truth the
science we use to defeat and kill one another, to spoile and utterly
to overthrow our owne kind, it seemeth it hath not much to make it
selfe to be wished for in beasts, that have it not.

  ----- quando leoni

  Fortior eripuit ritam leo, quo nemore unquam


  Expirarit aper maioris dentibus apri?/1


----- 1 JUVEN.  Sat. xv. 160.

  When hath a greater Lion damnifide

  A Lions life? in what wood ever di'de,

  A boare by tusks and gore,

  Of any greater boare?

Yet are not they altogether exempted from it witnesse the furious
encounters of Bees, and the hostile enterprises of the Princes and
Leaders of the two contrary Armies.

  ----- saepe duobus

  Regibus incessit magn6o discordia motu,

  Continuoque animos vulgi et trepidantia bello

  Corda licet longe praesciscere./1

  Oft-times twixt two so great Kings great dissentio

  With much adoe doth set them at contention;

  The vulgare mindes strait may you see from farre,

  And hearts that tremble at the thought of warre.

I never marke this divine description but mee thinkes I read humane
foolishnesse and worldly vanitie painted in it.  For these motions of
warre, which out of their horror and astonishment breed this tempest
of cries and clang of sounds in us:

  Fulgur ubi ad caelum se tollit, totaque circum

  AEre renidescit tellus, subterque virum vi

  Excitur pedibus sonitus, clamoreque montes

  Icti rejectant voces ad sidera mundi:/2

  Where lightning raiseth it selfe to the skies,

  The earth shines round with armour, soundes doe rise

  By mens force under feet, wounded with noyse

  The hilles to heav'n reverberate their voyce.

This horror-causing aray of so many thousands of armed men, so great
fusion, earnest fervor, and undaunted courage, it would make one laugh
to see by how many vaine occasions it is raised and set on fire, and
by what light meanes it is again suppressed and extinct.

  ----- Paridis propter narrator amorem

  Graecia Barbariae diro collisa duello./3


  For Paris lustfull love (as Stories tell)

  All Creece to direfull warre with Asia fell.


----- 1 VIRG.  Georg. 1. iv. 67. 2 LUCR. 1. ii. 326. 3 HOR. 1. i.
Epist. ii. 6.

The hatred of one man, a spight, a pleasure, a familiar suspect, or a
jealousie, causes which ought not to move two scolding fish-wives to
scratch one another, is the soule and motive of all this hurly-burly.
Shall we beleeve them that are the principall authors and causes
therof?  Let us but hearken unto the greatest and most victorious
Emperour that ever, was, how pleasantly he laughs and wittily he
plaies at so many battells and blooody fights, hazarded by both sea
and land, at the blood and lives of five hundred thousand soules which
followed his fortune, and the strength and riches of two parts of the
world consumed and drawne drie for the service of his enterprise:

  Quod futuit Glaphyran Antonius, hanc mihi poenam

  Fulvia constituit, se quoque uti futuam

  Fulviam ego ut furuam? quid si me Manius oret

  Paedicam, faciam? non puto, si sapiam.

  Aut futue, aut pugnemus, ait: quid si mihi vita

  Charior est ipsa mentula?  Signa canant./1

(I use my Latine somewhat boldly, but it is with that leave which you
have given mee.) This vast huge bodie hath so many faces and severall
motion, which seeme to threat both heaven and earth.

  Quam multi Lybico volvuntur marmore fluctus,

  Saevus ubi Orion hybernis conditur undis.

  Vel cum sole novo densae torrentur aristae,

  Aut Hermi campo, aut Lyciae flaventibus arvis,

  Scuta sonant, pulsuque pedum tremit excita tellus./2

  As many waves as rowle in Affricke marble bounds,

  When fierce Orion hides in Winter waves his head:

  Or when thicke-eares of Corne are parch't by Suune new- spred.

  In Hermus fruitfull fields, or Lycaes yellow grounds,

  With noyse of shields and feet, the trembling earth so sounds.

'This many-headed, divers-armed, and furiously-raging monster, is man,
wretched, weake and miserable man; whom, if you consider well, what is
he but a crawling and ever-moving ants-nest? {Pope+}

----- 1 MART, 1. xi.  Epig. xxi. 2 VIRG.  AEn. 1. vii. 717.

  It nigrum campis agmen:/1

  The sable-coloured band,

  Marches along the Land.

A gust of contrarie winds, the croking of a flight of Ravens, the
false pase of a horse, the casual flight of an Eagle, a dream, a
sodaine voyce, a false signe, a mornings mist, an evenings fogge, are
enough to overthrow, sufficient to overwhelme and able to pull him to
the ground.  Let the Sunne but shine hot upon his face, hee faints and
swelters with heat: cast but a little dust in his eyes, as to the Bees
mentioned by our Poet, all our ensignes, all our legions, yea great
Pompey himselfe, in the forefront of them is overthrowne and put to
rout. (For as I remember it was he whom Sertorius vanquished in
Spaine, with all those goodly armes.) This also served Eumenes against
Antigonus, and Surena against Crassus:

  Hi motus animorum, atque haec certamina tanta,

  Pulveris exigui jactu compressa quiescent./2

  Their stomacke-motions, these contentions great,

  Clam'd with a little dust, strait lose their heat.

Let us but uncouple some of our ordinary flies, and let loose a few
gnats amongst them, they shall have both the force to scatter and
courage to consume him.  The Portugals not long since beleagring the
City of Tamly, in the territory of Xiatine, the inhabitants thereof
brought great store of hives (whereof they have plentie) upon their
walls; and with fire drove them so forcible upon their enemies, who,
as unable to abide their assaults and endure their stingings, left
their enterprize. Thus by this new kinde of help was the libertie of
the towne gained and victory purchased; with so happy successe, that
in their retreating there was not one townes-man found wanting.  The
soules of Emperours and Coblers are all cast in one same mould.
Considering the importance of Princes actions,

----- 1 VIRG, AEn. 1. iv. 404. 2 VIRG.  Georg. 1. iv. 86, 87.

and their weight, wee perswade ourselves they are brought forth by
some weighty and important causes; wee are deceived: They are moved,
stirred and removed in their motions by the same springs and wards
that we are in ours.  The same reason that makes us chide and braule
and fall out with any of our neighbours, causeth a warre to follow
betweene Princes; the same reason that makes us whip or beat a lackey
maketh a Prince (if hee apprehend it) to spoyle and waste a whole
Province.  They have as easie a will as we, but they can doe much
more.  Alike desires perturbe both a skinne-worme and an Elephant.
Touching trust and faithfulnesse, there is no creature in the world so
trecherous as man.  Our histories report the earnest pursuit and
sharpe chase that some dogges have made for the death of their
masters.  King Pirrhus, finding a dog that watched a dead man, and
understanding he had done so three daies and nights together,
commanded the corps to be enterred and tooke the dog along with himn
It fortuned one day, as Pirrbus was surveying the general] musters of
his army the dog perceiving in that multitude the man who had
murthered his maister, loud-barking and with great rage ran furiously
upon him; by which signes he furthered and procured his maisters
revenge, which by way of justice was shortly executed.  Even so did
the dogge belonging to Hesiodus, surnamed the wise, having convicted
the children of Canister of Naupactus of the murther committed on his
Masters person.  Another Dogge being apointed to watch a Temple in
Athens, having perceived a sacrilegious theefe to carrie away the
fairest jewels therein, barked at him so long as he was able, and
seeing he could not awaken the Sextons or temple- keepers, followed
the theefe whither-soever he went; daie-light being come, he kept
himselfe a loof-off, but never lost the sight of him: if he offered
him meat, he utterly refused it; but if any passenger chanced to come
by, on them he fawned, with wagging his taile, and tooke what-ever
they offered him; if the theefe staied to rest himselfe, he also
staied in the same place.  The newes of this Dogge being come to the
Temple-keepers, they as they went along, enquiring of the Dogs haire
and colour, pursued his tracke so long that at last they found both
the Dog and the theefe in the Citie of Cromyon, whom they brought
backe to Athens, where for his offence he was severely punished.  And
the judges in acknowledgement of the Dogges good office, at the Cities
charge appointed him for his sustenance a certaine daily measure of
Corne, and enjoyned the Priests of the Temple, carefully to looke unto
him.  Plutarke affirmeth this storie to be most true, and to have
hapned in his time.  Touching gratitude+ and thankfulnesse (for me
thinks we have need to further this word greatly), this onely example
shall suffice, of which Appion reporteth to have been a spectator
himself.  One day (saith he) that the Senate of Rome (to please and
recreate the common people) causd a great number of wilde beasts to be
baited, namely huge great Lions, it so fortuned that there was one
amongst the rest, who by reason of his furious and stately carriage,
of his unmatched strength, of his great limbs, and of his loud and
terror-causing roaring, drew all bystanders eyes to gaze upon him.
Amongst other slaves, that in sight of all the people were presented
to encounter with these beasts, there chanced to be one Androclus+ of
Dacia, who belonged unto a Roman Lord who had been Consull.  This huge
Lion, having eyed him afar off, first made a suddaine stop, as
strucken into a kind of admiration, then with a milde and gentle
contenance, as if he would willingly have taken acquaintance of him),
faire and softly approached unto him: Which done, and resting, assured
he was the man he tooke him for, begun fawningly to wagge his taile,
as dogges doe that fawne upon their newfound masters, and licke the
poore and miserable slaves bands and thighs, who through fears was
almost out of his wits and halfe dead.  Androclus at last taking hart
of grace, and by reason of the Lions mildnesse having rouzed up his
spirits, and wishly fixing his eies upon him, to see whether he could
call him to remembrance, it was to all beholders a singular pleasure
to observe the love, the joy, and blandishments each endevored to
enter-shew one another.  Whereat the people raising a loud crie, and
by their shouting and clapping; of hands seeming to be much pleased,
the Emperour willed the slave to be brought before him, as desirous to
understand of him the cause of so strange and seld-seene an accident,
who related this new and wonderfull storie unto him.  My Master (said
he) being Proconsull in Affrica, forsomuch as he caused me every day
to be most cruelly beaten, and held me in so rigorous bondage, I was
constrained, as being wearie of my life, to run away; and safely to
scape from so eminent a person, and who had so great authoritie in the
Countrie, I thought it best to get me to the desart and most
unfrequented wildernesses of that region, with a full resolution, if I
could not compasse the meanes to sustaine my selfe, to finde one way
or other, with violence to make myselfe away.  One day the Sunne about
noone- tide became extremely hote, and the scorching heat thereof
intolerable, I fortuned to come unto a wilde unhauted cave, hidden
amongst crags and almost inaccessible, and where imagined no footing
had ever been; therein I hid myselfe.  I had not long been there but
in comes this Lion, with one of his pawes sore hurt, and
bloody-goared, wailing for the smart, and groaning for the paine he
felt; at whose arrivall I was much dismaied, but he seeing me lie
close-cowering in a corner of his den, gently made his approaches unto
me, holding forth his goared paw toward me and seemed with shewing the
same humbly to sue and suppliantly to beg for help at my hands.  I,
moved with ruth, taking it into my hand, pulled out a great splint
which was gotten into it, and shaking off all feare, first I wrung and
crusht his sore, and caused the filth and matter, which therein was
gathered, to come forth; then, as gently as for my heart I could, I
cleansed, wiped, and dried the same.  He feeling some ease in his
griefe, and his paine to cease, still holding his foot betweene my
hands, began to sleep and take some rest.  Thence forward he and I
lived together the full space of three yeares in his den, with such
meat as he shifted-for; for what beasts he killed, or what prey soever
he tooke, he ever brought home the better part and shared it with me,
which for want of fire I rotted in the Sunne, and therewith nourished
my selfe all that while.  But at last, wearied with this kind of
brutish life, the Lion being one day gone to purchase his wonted prey,
I left the place, hoping to mend my fortunes, and having wandred up
and downe three dayes, I was at last taken by certaine souldiers,
which from Africa brought me into this Citie to my Master againe, who
immediately condemned me to death, and to be devoured by wilde beasts.
And as I now perceive, the same Lion was also shortly after taken, who
as you see hath now requited me of the good turne I did him, and the
health which by my meanes he recovered.  Behold here the historie
Androclus reported unto the Emperour, which after he caused to be
declared unto all the people, at whose generall request he was
forthwith set at libertie, and quit of his punishment, and by the
common consent of all had the Lion bestowed upon him.  Appion saith
further, that Androclus was daily seen to lead the Lion up and downe
the streets of Rome, tied onely with a little twine, and walking from
taverne to taverne, received such money as was given him, who would
gently suffer himseIf to be handled, touched, decked, and strowed with
flowers, all over and over, many saying when they met him: 'Yonder is
the Lion that is the mans hoste, and yonder is the man that is the
Lions Physitian.  We often mourne and weepe for the losse of those
beasts we love, so doe they many times for the losse of us.

  Post bellator equus positis insiqnibus Aethon

  It lacrimans, guttisque humectat grandibus ora./1

  Next AEthon horse of warre, all omaments laid downe,

  Goes weeping, with great drops bedewes his cheeckes adowne.


----- VIRG.  AEn. 1. xi. 89.


As some of our nations have wives in common and some in severall, each
man keeping himselfe to his owne, so have some beasts; yet some there
are that observe their marriage with as great respect as we doe ours.
Touching the mutuall societie and reciprocall confederation which they
devise amongst themselves, that so they may be fast combined together,
and in times of need help one another, it is apparant that if Oxen,
Hogs, and other beasts, being hurt by us, chance to crie, all the
heard runnes to aid him, and in his defence will joine all together.
The fish, called of the Latines Scarus, having swallowed the fishers
hook, his fellowes will presently flocke about him, and nible the line
in sunder; and if any of them happen to be taken in a bow-net, some of
his fellowes, turning his head away, will put his taile in at the neck
of the net, who with his teeth fast- bolding the same, never leave him
untill they have pulled him out.  The Barbel fishes, if one of them
chance to be engaged, will set the line against their backes, and with
a fin they have, toothed like a sharp saw, presently saw and fret the
same asunder.  Concerning particular offices, which we for the benefit
of our life draw one from an other, many like examples are found
amongst them.  It is assuredly beleeved that the Whale never swimmeth
unlesse she have a little fish going before her as her vantgard; it is
in shape like a Gudgeon, and both the Latines and we call it the
Whale-guide; for she doth ever follow him, suffering herself as easily
to be led and turned by him as the ship is directed and turned by a
sterne: for requitall of which good turne, whereas all things else, be
it beast, fish, or vessell, that comes within the horrible Chaos of
this monstrous mouth, is presently lost and devoured, this little fish
doth safety retire himselfe therein, and there sleepes verie quietly,
and as long as he sleepes the Whale never stirs; but as soone as he
awaketh and goeth his way, wherever he takes his course she alwaies
followeth him, and if she fortune to lose him, she wanders here and
there, and often striketh upon the rocks, as a ship that hath nor mast
nor rudder.  This Plutarke witnesseth to have seen in the Iland of
Anticyra.  There is such a like societie betweene the little bird
called a Wren and the Crocodill; for the Wren serveth as a sentinell
to so great a monster: And if the Ichneumon, which is his mortall
enemie, approach to fight with him, the little birdlet, lest he might
surprise him whilst he sleepeth, with his singing, and pecking him
with his bill, awakens him, and gives him warning of the danger he is
in.  The bird liveth by the scraps, and feedeth upon the leavings of
that monster, who gently receiveth him into his mouth, and suffers him
to pecke his jawes and teeth for such mamokes of flesh as sticke
betweene them: and if he purpose to close his mouth, he doth first
warne him to be gone, faire and easie closing it by little and little,
without any whit crushing or hurting him.  The shell-fish called a
nacre liveth even so with the pinnotere, which is a little creature
like unto a crabfish, and as his porter or usher waits upon him,
attending the opening of the nacre, which he continually keepes gaping
until he see some little fish enter in, fit for their turne, then he
creepes into the nacre, and leaves not pinching his quicke flesh
untill he makes him close his shell, and so they both together, fast
in their hold, devour their prey. In the manner of the tunnies life
may be discovered a singular knowledge of the three parts of the
mathematikes.  First for astrologie, it may well be said that man doth
learne it of them: for wheresoever the winter Solstitium doth take
them, there do they stay themselves, and never stir till the next
Equinoctium, and that is the reason why Aristotle doth so willingly
ascribe that art unto them: then for geometric and arithmetike, they
alwaies frame their shole of a cubike figure, every way square: and so
forme a solide close and well-ranged battalion, encompassed round
about of six equall sides.  Thus orderly marshaled, they take their
course and swim whither their journey tends, as broad and wide behind
as before: so that he that seeth and telleth but one ranke, may easily
number all the troope, forsomuch as the number of the depth is equall
unto the bredth, and the bredth unto the length.  Touching
magnanimitie and haughtie courage, it is hard to set it forth more
lively, and to produce a rarer patterne than that of the dog which
from India was sent unto Alexander: to whom was first presented a
stag, then a wilde boare, and then a beare, with each of which he
should have foughten, but he seemed to make no accompt of them, and
would not so much as remove out of his place for them; but when he saw
a lion, he presently rouzed himselfe, shewing evidently he meant onely
so noble a beast worthie to enter combat with him.  Concerning
repentance and acknowledging of faults committed, it is reported that
an elephant, having, through rage of choler, slaine his governour,
conceived such an extreme inward griefe that he would never afterward
touch any food, and suffered himselfe to pine to death.  Touching
clemencie, it is reported of a tiger (the fiercest and most inhumane
beast of all having a kid given her to feed upon, endured the force of
gnawing hunger two daies together rather than she would hurt him; the
third day with maine strength she brake the cage wherein she was kept
pent, and went elsewhere to shift for feeding; as one unwilling to
seize upon the seelie kid, her familiar and guest.  And concerning
privileges of familiaritie and sympathie caused by conversation, is it
not oft seen how some make cats, dogs, and hares so tame, so gentle,
and so milde, that, without harming one another, they shall live and
continue together?  But that which experience teacheth sea-faring men,
especially those that come into the seas of Sicilie, of the qualitie
and condition of the Halcyon bird, or as some call it alcedo or
kings-fisher, exceeds all mens conceit. In what kinds of creature did
ever nature so much prefer both their hatching, sitting, brooding, and
birth?  Poets faine that the Iland of Delos, being before wandring and
fleeting up and downe, was for the delivery of Latona made firme and
setled; but Gods decree hath beene that all the watrie wildernesse
should be quiet and made calm, without raine, wind, Now from what
vanitie can it proceed, we should so willfully contemne and
disdainfully interpret those effects, which we can neither imitate nor
conceive?  But to follow this equalitie or correspondences betweene us
and beasts somewhat further: the privilege whereof our soule vants, to
bring to her condition whatsoever it conceiveth, and to despoile what
of mortall and corporall qualities belongs unto it, to marshall those
things which she deemed worthie her acquaintance, to disrobe and
deprive their corruptible conditions, and to make them leave as
superfluous and base garments, thicknesses, length, depth, weight,
colour, smell, roughnesse, smoothnesse, hardnesse, softnesse, and all
sensible accidents else, to fit and appropriate them to her immortall
and spirituall condition: so that Rome and Paris, which I have in my
soule; Paris which I imagine; yea, I imagine and conceive the same
without reatnesse and place, without stone and morter. and without
wood; then say I unto my selfe, the same privilege seemeth likewise to
be in beasts: for a horse accustomed to heare the sound of trumpets,
the noyse of shot, and the clattering of armes, whom we see to snort,
to startle, and to neigh in his sleep, as he lies along upon his
litter, even as he were in the hurly burly; it is most certaine, that
in his minde he apprebends the sound of a drum without any noyse, and
an armie without armes or bodie.  Quippe videbis equos fortes, cum
membra jacebunt

  In somnis, sudare tamen, spirareque saepe,

  Et quasi de palma summas contenders vires./1

  You shall see warlike horses, when in sleep

  Their limbs lie, yet sweat, and a snorting keep.

  And stretch their utmost strength,

  As for a goale at length.

That hare which a grey-bound imagineth in his dreame, after whom as he
sleepeth we see him bay quest, yelp, and snort, stretch out his taile,
shake his

----- 1 LUCR. 1. iv. 982.

  legs, and perfectly represent the motions of his course the same is
  a hare without bones, without haire.

  Venantumque canes in molli saepe quiete,

  Iactant crura tamen subito, vocesque repente

  Mittunt, et crebras reducunt naribus auras,

  Ut vestigia si teneant inventa ferarunt

  Expergefactique, sequuntur inania saepe,

  Crvorum simulacra, fugae quasi dedita cernant:

  Donec discussis redeant erroribus ad se./1

  Oft times the hunters dogs in easie rest

  Stir their legs, suddainly, open, and quest,

  And send from nosthrils thicke-thicke snuffing sent

  As if on traile they were of game full-bent:

  And wakened so, they follow shadowes vaine

  Of Deere in chase, as if they fled amaine:

  Till, their fault left, they turne to sense againe.

Those watching-dogs which in their sleep we sometimes see to grumble,
and then barking, to startle suddainly out of their slumber, as if
they perceived some stranger to arive, that stranger which their minde
seemeth to see is but an imaginarie man, and not perceived, without
any dimension, colour, or being:

  -----Consueta domi catulorum blanda propago

  Degere, saepe levem ex oculis volucremque soporem


  Discutere, et corpus de terra corripere instant

  Proinde quasi ignotas facies atque ora tuantur./2

  The fawning kind of whelps, at home that liv's,

  O From eyes to shake light-swift sleepe often striv's,

  And from the ground their starting bodies hie,

  As if some unknowne stranger they did spie.

Touching corporall beauties before I goe any further it were
necessarie I know whether we are yet agreed about her description.  It
is very likely that we know not well what beautie either in nature or
in generall is, since we give so many and attribute so divers formes
to humane beauties yea, and to our beautie: Of which if there were any
naturall or lively description, we should generally know it, as we doe
the heat of fire.

----- 1 LUCR. 1. iv. 986. 2 Ib. 993.

  We imagine and faine her formes, as our fantasies lead us.

  Turpis Romano Belgicus ore color./1

  A Dutch-froes colour hath no grace,

  Seen in a Roman Ladies face.

The Indians describe it blacks and swarthy, with blabbered- thick
lips, with a broad and flat nose, the inward gristle whereof they
loade with great gold rings, hanging downe to their mouth, and their
neather lips with great circlets beset with precious stones, which
cover all their chins, deeming it an especiall grace to shew their
teeth to the roots.  In Peru, the greatest eares are ever esteemed the
fairest, which with all art and industrie they are continually
stretching out; and a man (who yet liveth) sweareth to have seen in a
Province of the East Indias the people so carefull to make them great,
and so to load them with heavie jewels, that with ease he could have
thrust his arme through one of their eare-holes.  There are other
Nations who endevour to make their teeth as blacke as jeat, and skorne
to have them white; and in other places they die them red.  Not onely
in the province of Baske, but in other places, women are accounted
fairest when their heads are shaven, and which is strange, in some of
the Northerly frozen-countries, as Plinie affirmeth.  Those of Mexico
esteems the littlenesse of their foreheads as one of the chiefest
beauties, and whereas they shave their haire over all their bodie
besides, by artificiall meanes they labour to nourish and make it grow
onely in their foreheads; and so love to have great dugs, that they
strive to have their children sucke over their shoulders.  So would we
set forth ilfavordnesse. The Italians proportion it big and plum; the
Spaniards spynie and lanke; and amongst us one would bave her white,
another browne, and soft and delicate, another strong and lustie; some
desire wantonnesse and blithnesse, and othersome sturdinesse and

----- 1 PROPERT. 1. ii.  Eleg. xviii. 26.

majestie to be joyned with it.  Even as the preheminence in beauties
which Plato ascribeth unto the Sphericall figure, the Epicureans refer
the same unto the Piramidall or Square; and say they cannot swallow a
God made round like a bowle.  But howsoever it is, nature hath no more
privileged us in that than in other things, concerning her common
lawes.  And if we impartially enter into judgement with our selves, we
shall finde that if there be any creature or beast lesse favoured in
that than we, there are others (and that in great numbers) to whom
nature hath been more favourable than to us.  A multis animalibus
decore vincimur:/1 'We are excelled in comelinesse, by many living
creatures:' Yea, of terrestriall creatures that live with us.  For,
concerning those of the Sea, omitting their figure, which no
proportion can containe, so much doth it differ, both in colour, in
neatnesse, in smoothnesse, and in disposition, we must give place unto
them: which in all qualities we must likewise doe to the eyrie ones.
And that prerogative which Poets yeeld unto our upright stature,
looking towards heaven whence her beginning is,

  Pronaque cum spectent animalia caetera terram,

  Os homini sublime dedit, caelumque videre

  Iussit, et erectos ad sidera tollere vultus,/2

  Where other creatures on earth looke and lie,

  A loftie looke God gave man, had him prie

  On heav'n, rais'd his high countenance to the skie,

is meerely poeticall, for there are many little beasts that have their
sight directly, fixed towards heaven: I finde the Camels and the
Estridges necke much more raised and upright than ours.  What beasts
have not their face aloft and before, and looke not directly opposite
as we; and in their naturall posture descrie not as much of heaven and
earth as man doth?  And what qualities of our corporall constitution,
both in Plato and Cicero, cannot fit and serve a thousand beasts?
Such as most resemble man are the vilest and

----- 1 SEN.  Epist. cxxiv. 1 OVID.  Metam. 1. i. 84

  filthiest of all the rout: As for outward apparance and true shape
  of the visage, it is the Munkie or Ape:

  Simia quam similis, turpissima bestia, nobis!/1

  An Ape, a most il-favored beast,

  How like to us in all the rest?' {Yahoo+}

as for inward and vitall parts, it is the Hog.  Truely, when I
  consider man all naked (yea, be it in that sex which seemeth to have
  and challenge the greatest share of eye-pleasing beautie) and view
  his defects, his naturall subjection, and manifold imperfections, I
  finde we have had much more reason to hide and cover our nakednesse
  than any creature else.  We may be excused for borrowing those which
  nature had therein favored more than us, with their beauties to
  adorne us, and under their spoiles of wooll, of haire, of feathers,
  and of silke to shroud us.  Let us moreover observe, that man is the
  onely creature whose wants offend his owne fellowes, and he alone
  that in naturall actions must withdraw and sequester himselfe from
  those of his owne kinde.  Verely it is an effect worthie
  consideration, that the skilfullest masters of amorous dalliaunce
  appoint for a remedie of venierian passions a free and full survay
  of the bodie, which one longeth and seeks after: and that to coole
  the longing and aswage the heat of friendship, one need but
  perfectly view and thoroughly consider what he loveth.  Ille quod
  obscaenas in aperto corpore partes

  Viderat, in cursu qui fuit, heasit amor./2

  The love stood still, that ran in full cariere,

  When bare it saw parts that should not appeare.

And although this remedie may haply proceed from a squeamish and cold
humor, yet it is a wonderfull signe of our imbecillitie that the use
and knowledge should so make us to be cloyd one of an other. It is not
bashfulnesse so much as art and foresight makes our Ladies so
circumspect and unwilling to let us come

----- 1 CIC.  Nat.  Deor. 1. i.  Enni. 1 OVID.  Rem.  Am. 1. ii. 33.

  into their closets before they are fully readie and throughly
  painted, to come abroad and shew themselves:

  Nec veneres nostras hoc fallit, quo magis ipsae

  Omnia summopere hos vitae post scaenia celant,

  Quos retinere volunt adstrictoque esse in amore./1

  Our Mistresses know this, which makes them not disclose

  Parts to be plaid within, especially from those

  Whom they would servants hold, and in their love-bands close:

Whereas, in other creatures there is nothing but we love and pleaseth
our senses: so that even from their excrements and ordure we draw not
only dainties to eat, but our richest ornaments and perfumes.  This
discourse of beautie toucheth only our common order, and is not so
sacrilegious as it intendeth or dareth to comprehend those divine,
supernaturally and extraordinarie beauties which sometimes are seen to
shine amongst as, even as stars under a corporall and terrestriall
veile. Moreover, that part of natures favours which we impart unto
beasts, is by our owne confession much more advantageous unto them.
We assume unto our selves imaginarie and fantasticall goods, future
and absent goods, which humane capacitie can no way warrant unto her
selfe; or some other, which by the overweening of our owne opinion we
falsely ascribe unto our selves; as reason, honour, and knowledge; and
to them as their proper share we leave the essentiall, the manageable,
and palpable goods, as peace, rest, securitie, innocencie, and health:
I say, which is the goodliest and richest present nature can impart
unto us.  So that even Stoike Philosophie dareth to affirme, that if
Heraclitus and Pherecydes could have changed their wisdome with
health,'and by that meanes the one to have rid himselfe of the dropsie
and the other of the lowsie- evill, which so sore tormented them, they
would surely have done it: whereby they also yeeld so much more honor
unto wisdom by comparing and counterpeizing the same

----- 1 LUCR. 1. iv. 1176.

unto health, than they do in this other proposition of theirs, where
they say, that if Circe had presented Vlisses with two kinds of
drinke, the one to turne a wise man into a foole, the other to change
a foole into a wise man, he would rather have accepted that of folly,
than have been pleased that Circe should transforme his humane shape
into a beasts.  And they say that Wisdome herselfe would thus have
spoken unto him: 'Meddle not with me, but leave me rather than then
shouldst place me under the shape and bodie of an Asse.  What?  This
great and heavenly wisdom?  Are Phylosophers contented then to quit it
for a corporall and earthly veile?  Why then it is not for reasons
sake, nor by discourse and for the soule, we so much excell beasts: it
is for the love we beare unto our beautie, unto our faire hew, and
goodly disposition of limbs, that we reject and set our understanding
at naught, our wisdome, and what else we have.  Well, I allow of this
ingenious and voluntarie confession surely they knew those parts we so
much labour to pamper to be meere fantasies.  Suppose beasts had all
the vertue, the knowledge, the wisdome and sufficiency of the Stoikes,
they should still be beasts; nor might they ever be compared unto a
miserable, wretched, and senseless man.  For, when all is done,
whatsoever is not as we are, is not of any worth.  And God to be
esteemed of us, must (as we will show anon) draw somewhat neere it.
Whereby it appeareth that it is not long of a true discourse, but of a
foolish hardinesse and selfe-perfuming obstinacie, we prefer ourselves
before other creatures, and sequester our selves from their condition
and societie. {Gulliver+} But to returne to our purpose: we have for
our part inconstancie, irresolution, uncertaintie, sorrow,
superstition, carefulnesse for future things (yea after our life),
ambition, covetousnesse, jelousie, envie, inordinate, mad, untamed
appetites, warre, falsehood, disloyaltie, detraction, and curiositie.
Surely we have strangely overpaid this worthie discourse, whereof we
so much glorie, and this readinesse to judge, or capacitie to Knowow,
if we have purchased the same with the price of so infinite passions
to which we are uncessantly enthralled.  If we be not pleased (as
Socrates is) to make this noble prerogative over beasts, to be of
force, that whereas nature hath subscribed them certaine seasons and
bounds for their naturall lust and voluptuousnesse, she hath given us
at all howers and occasions the full reines of them.  Ut vinum
aegrotis, quia prodest raro, nocet saepissime, melius est non adhibere
omnino, quam, spe dubiae salutis, in apertam perniciem incurrere: Sic,
ha ud scio, an melius fuerit humano generi motum motum celerem
cogitationis, acumen, solertiam quam rationem vocamus, quoniam
pestifera sint multis, admodum paucis salutaria, non dari omnino, quam
tam munifice et tam large dari:/1 'As it is better not to use wine at
all in sicke persons, because it seldome doth them good, but many
times much hurt, than in hope of doubtfull health to run into
undoubted danger; so doe I not knowe whether it were better that this
swift motion of the thought, this sharpenesse this conceitednesse
which we call reason+, should not at all be given to mankind (because
it is pernicious unto many and healthfull to very few) than that it
should be given so plentifully and so largely. {animal_rationis+} What
good or commoditie may we imagine this far-understanding of so many
things brought ever unto Varro+ and to Aristotle?  Did it ever exempt,
or could it at any time free them from humane inconveniences?  Were
they ever discharged of those accidents that incidently follow a
seelie labouring man?  Could they ever draw any ease for the gout from
logike?  And howbeit they knew the humour engendering the same to
lodge in the joints, have they felt it the lesse?  Did they at any
time make a covenant with death, although they knew full well that
some nations rejoice at her comming? as also of cuckoldship, because
they knew women to be common in some countries?  But contrariwise
having both held the first ranke in knowledge, the one amongst the
Romans, the other among the Grecians, yea, and at such times

----- 1 CIC.  Nat.  Deor. 1. iii. c. 27.

wherein sciences flourished most, we could never learne they had any
speciall excellencie in their life.  Wee see the Graecian hath been
put to his plunges in seeking to discharge himselfe from some notable
imputations in his life.  Was it ever found that sensualitie and
health are more pIeasing unto him that understands Astrologie and
Grammar?

  (Illiterate num minus nervi rigent?/1

  As stiffe unlearned sinnewes stand,

  As theirs that much more understand.)

  or shame and povertie lesse importunate and vexing?

  Scilicet et morbis, et debilitate carebis,

  Et luctun, et curam et tempora vitae

  Longa tibi posthaec fato meliore dabuntur./2

  Thou shalt be from disease and weaknesse free,

  From moane, from care, long time of life to thee

  ; Shall by more friendly fate affoorded be.

I have in my daies seene a hundred artificers, and as many labourers,
more wise and more happy than some sectors in the Universitie, and
whom I would rather resemble.  Me thinks learning hath a place amongst
things necessarie for mans life, as glorie+, noblenesse, dignitie, or
at most as riches, {list+} and such other qualities, which indeed
stead the same; but afar off and more in conceipt than by Nature. We
have not much more need of offices, of rules, and lawes how to live in
our commonwealth than the cranes and ants have in theirs.  Which
notwithstanding, we see how orderly and without instruction they
maintaine themselves.  If man were wise he would value everything
according to its worth, and as it is either more profitable or more
necessarie for life.  He that shall number us by our actions and
proceedings, shall doubtlesse finde many more excellent ones amongst
the ignorant than among the wiser sort: I meane in all kinde of
vertues.  My opinion is, that ancient Rome brought

----- 1 HOR.  Epod. viii. 17. 2 JUVEN.  Sat. xiv. 166.

forth many men of much more valour and sufficiencie, both for peace
and warre, than this late learned Rome, which with all her wisdom hath
overthrowne her erst-flourishing estate.  If all the rest were alike,
then should honestie+ and innocencie at least belong to the ancient,
for she was exceedingly well placed with simplicities+.  But I will
shorten this discourse, which haply would draw me further than I would
willingly follow: yet thus much I will say more, that onely humilitie+
and submission is able to make a perfect honest+ man.  Every one must
not have the knowledge of his dutie referred to his owne judgement,
but ought rather to have it prescribed unto him, and not be allowed to
chose it at his pleasure and free will: otherwise, according to the
imbecilitie of our reasons, and infinite varietie of our opinions, we
might peradventure forge and devise such duties unto ourselves, as
would induce us (as Epicurus saith) to endevour to destroy and devoure
one another. {bourgeois_individualism+} The first law that ever God
gave unto man was a law of pure obedience.  It was a bare and simple
commandement whereof man should enquire and know no further: forasmuch
as to obey is the proper dutie of a reasonable soul, acknowledging a
heavenly and superiour benefactor.  From obeying and yeelding unto him
proceed all other vertues, even as all sinnes derive from
selfe-overweening. Contrariwise, the first temptation that ever seized
on human nature was disobedience, by the devils instigation, whose
first poison so far insinuated it selfe into us, by reason of the
promises he made us of wisdome and knowledg: Eritis sicut Dii scientes
bonum et malum:/1 'You shall be like Gods, knowing both good and
evill.'  And the Syrens, to deceive Vllysses, and alluring him to fall
into their dangerous and confounding snares, offer to give him the
full fruition of knowledge.  The opinion of wisdome is the plague of
man. {intellectual_snobbery+} That is the occasion why ignorance is by
our religion recommended unto us as an instrument fitting beleefe and
obedience: Cavete, ne

----- 1 Gen. iii. 5.

Quis vos decipiat per Philosophiam et inanessseductiones, secundum
elementa mundi:/1 'Take heed lest any man deceive you by Philosophie
and vaine seducements, according to the rudiments of the world.' All
the Philosophers of all the sects that ever were doe generally agree
in this point, that the chiefest felicitie, or summum onum, consisteth
in the peace and tranquillitie of the soule and bodie: but where shall
we finde it?

  Ad summum sapiens uno minor est Iove, dives;

  Liber, honoratus, puIcher, Rex denique Regum:

  Praecipue sanus, nisi cum pituita molesta est./2

  In summe, who wise is knowne,

  Is less than Jove alone,

  Rich, honorable, free, faire, King of Kings,

  Chiefely in health, but when fleagme trouble brings.

It seemeth verily that nature for the comfort of our miserable and
wretched condition hath allotted us no other portion but presumption.
It is therefore (as Epictetus+ saith) that man hath nothing that is
properly his owne but the use of his opinions.  Our hereditarie
portion is nothing but smoke and wind.  The Gods (as saith
Philosophie) have health in true essence, and sicknesse in conceipt.
Man, cleane contrarie, possesseth goods in imagination, and evils
essentially.  Wee have had reason to make the powers of our
imagination to be of force: for all our facilities are but in
conceipt, and as it were in a dreame. {Fortune+} Heare but this poore
and miserable creature vaunt himselfe.  There is nothing (saith
Cicero) so delightfull and pleasant as the knowledge of letters; of
letters+, I say, by whose meanes the infinitie of things, the
incomprehensible greatnesse of nature, the heavens, the earth, and all
the seas of this vast universe, are made knowne unto us.  They have
taught us religion, moderation, stowtnesse of courage, and redeemed
our soule out of darknesse, to make her see and distinguish of all
things, the high as well as the lowe, the first as the last, and those
betweene both.

----- 1 Col. ii. 8. 2 HOR. 1. i.  Epist. i. 106

It is they that store and supply us with all such things as may make
us live happily and well, and instruct us how to passe our time
without sorrow or offence.  Seemeth not this goodly orator to speake
of the Almighties and everliving Gods condition?  And touching
effects, a thousand poore seelie women in a countrie towne have lived
and live a life much more reposed, more peaceable, and more constant
than ever he did. {Wordsworth+}

  -----Deus ille fuit Deus, inclyte Memmi,

  Qui princeps vitae rationem invenit eam, quae

  Nunc appellatur sapienta, quique per artem,

  Fluctibus e tantis vitam tantisque tenebris,

  In tam tranquillo et tam clara luce locavit.

  Good sir, it was God, God it was, flrst found

  That course of man's life, which now is renown'd

  By name of wisdome; who by art reposed,

  Our life in so cleare light, calme so composed,

  From so great darknesse, so great waves opposed.

Observe what glorious and noble words these be yet but a sleight
accident brought this wisemans understanding to a far worse condition
than that of a simple shepherd: notwithstanding this divine Teacher,
and this heavenly wisdome.  Of like impudence is the promise of
Democritus his Booke, 'I will now speake of all things;' And that fond
title which Aristotle gives us of mortall gods, and that rash
judgement of Chrysippus that Dion was as vertuous as God: And
my_Seneca+ saith he acknowledgeth that God hath given him life, but
how to live well that he hath of himselfe.  Like unto this other: In
virtute vere gloriamur, quod non contingeret, si id donum a Deo non a
nobis haberemus:/2 {non_nobis+} 'We rightly vaunt us of vertue, which
we should not doe, if we had it of God, not of ourselves:' This also
is Senecaes, that the wise man hath a fortitude like unto Gods; but in
humanity weaknesse wherein he excelleth him.  There is nothing more
common than to meet with such passages of temeritie: There is not any
of us that will be so much offended to see himselfe

----- 1 LUCR. 1. v. 8. 2 CIC.  Nat.  Deor. 1. iii.

compared to God as he will deeme himselfe wrong to be depressed in the
ranke of other creatures.  So much are we more jealous of our owne
interest than of our Creators.  But we must tread this foolish vanitie
under foot, and boldly shake off and lively reject those fond
ridiculous foundations whereon these false opinions are built.  So
long as man shall be perswaded to have meanes or power of himselfe, so
long will he denie and never acknowledge what he oweth unto his
Master: he shall alwaies (as the common saying is) make shift with his
owne: He must be stripped unto his shirt.  Let us consider some
notable example of the effect of Philosophie.  Possidonius having long
time been grieved with a painfull-lingring diseease which with the
smarting paine made him wring his hands and gnash his teeth, thought
to scorne grief with exclaiming and crying out against it: 'Doe what
thou list, yet will I never say that thou art evil or paine.  He
feeleth the same passions that my lackey doth, but he boasteth
himselfe that at least he conteineth his tongue under the lawes of his
sect.  Re succumbere non oportebat verbis gloriantem;/1 'It was not
for him to yeeld in deeds, who had so braved it in words+.' Arcesilas
lying sicke of the gowt, Carneades comming to visit him, and seeing
him to frowne, supposing he had been angrie, was going away again, but
he called him back, and shewing him his feet and breast, said unto
him, 'There is nothing come from thence hither.  This hath somewhat a
better garb;' for he feeleth himselfe grieved with sicknesse, and
would faine be rid of it, yet is not his heart vanquished or weakned
thereby, the other stands upon his stifnesse (as I feare) more verball
than essentiall And Dionysius Heracleotes being tormented with a
violent smarting in his eies, was at last perswaded to quit these
Stoicke+ resolutions.  Be it supposed that Learning and Knowledge
should worke those effects they speake of, that is, to blunt and abate
the sharpnesse of those accidents or mischances that follow and attend
us; doth she any more than ----- 1 CIC.  Tusc.  Qu. 1. ii. c. 25.


what ignorance effecteth much more evidently and simply?  The
Philosopher Pyrrho being at sea, and by reason of a violent storme in
great danger to be cast away, presented nothing unto those that were
with him in the ship to imitate but the securitie of an Hog which was
aboard, who, nothing at all dismaied, seemed to behold and outstare
the tempest.  Philosophie after all her precepts gives us over to the
examples of a Wrestler or of a Muletier, in whom we ordinarily
perceive much lesse feeling of death, of paine, of grief, and other
conveniences, and more undaunted constancie, than ever Learning or
Knowledge could store a man withall, {common+} unlesse he were born
and of himselfe through some naturall habitude prepared unto it.  What
is the cause the tender members of a childe or limbs of a horse are
much more easie and with lesse paine cut and incised than ours, if it
be not ignorance?  How many, only through the power of imagination,
have falne into dangerous diseases?  We ordinarily see diverse that
will cause themselves to be let bloud, purged, and dieted, because
they would be cured of diseases they never felt but in conceit; when
essentiall and true maladies faile us, then Science and Knowledge lend
us hers: This colour or complexion (said she) presageth some
rheumatike defluxion will ensue you: This soultring-hot season
menaceth you with some febricant commotion; this cutting of the vitall
line of your left hand warneth you of some notable and approaching
indisposition.  And at last she will roundly addresse herselfe unto
perfect health; saying this youthly vigour and suddain joy cannot
possibly stay in one place, her bloud and strength must be abated, for
feare it turne you to some mischiefe.  Compare but the life of a man
subject to these like imaginations, unto that of a day-laboring
swaine, who followes his naturall appetites, who measureth all things
onely by the present sense, and hath neither learning nor
prognostications, who feeleth no disease but when he hath it: whereas
the other hath often the stone imaginarily before he have it in his
reines: as if it were not time enough to endure the sicknesse when it
shall come, he doth in his fancie prevent the same, and beadlong
runneth to meet with it.  What I speake of Physicke, the same may
generally be applied and drawne to all manner of learning.  Thence
came this ancient opinion of those Philosophers who placed chiefe
felicitie in the knowledge of our judgements weaknesse.  My ignorance
affords me as much cause of hope as of feare: and having no other
regiment for my health than that of other men's examples, and of the
events I see elsewhere in like occasions whereof I find some of all
sorts: and relie upon the comparisons that are most favourable unto
me.  I embrace health with open armes, free, plaine, and full, and
prepare my appetite to enjoy it, by how much more it is now lesse
ordinarie and more rare unto me: so far is it from me that I, with the
bitternesse of some new and forced kind of life, trouble her rest and
molest her ease.  Beasts do manifestly declare unto us how many
infirmities our mindes agitation brings us.  That which is told us of
those that inhabit Bresill, who die onely through age, which some
impute to the clearnesse and calmnenesse of their aire, I rather
ascribe to the calmenesse and clearnesse of their mindes, void and
free from all passions, cares, toiling, and unpleasant labours, as a
people that passe their life in a wonderfull kind of simplicitie and
ignorance, without letters, or lawes and without Kings or any
Religion. {noble_savage+} Whenc comes it (as we daily see by
experience) that the rudest and grossest clownes are more tough,
strong, and more desired in amorous executions; and that the love of a
Muletier is often more accepted than that of a perfumed quaint
courtier?  But because in the latter the agitation of his mind doth so
distract, trouble, and wearie the force of his bodie, {Hamlet+} as it
also troubleth and wearieth it selfe, who doth belie, or more commonly
cast the same down even into madnesse, but her own promptitude, her
point, her agilitie, and, to conclude, her proper force?  Whence
proceeds the subtilest follie but from the subtilest wisdome?
{PlainDealer+} As from the extremest friendships proceed the extremest
enmities and from the soundest healths the mortallest diseases, so
from the rarest and quickest agitations of our mindes ensue the most
distempered and outrageous frenzies.  There wants but half a pegs
turne to passe from the one to the other.  In mad mens actions we see
how fitlie follie suteth and meets with the strongest operations of
our minde.  Who knowes not how unperceivable the neighbourhood between
follie with the liveliest elevations of a free minde is, and the
effects of a supreme and extraordinarie vertue.  Plato affirmeth that
melancholy mindes are more excellent and discipliuable; so are there
none more inclinable unto follie.  Diverse spirits, are seen to be
overthrowne by their owne force and proper nimblenesse.  What a start
hath one/1 of the most judicious, ingenious, and most fitted under the
ayre of true ancient poesie, lately gotten by his owne agitation and
selfe- gladnesse, above all other Italian Poets that have been of a
long time?  Hath not he wherewith to be beholding unto this his
killing vivacitie? unto this clearnesse that hath so blinded him? unto
his exact and far-reaching apprehension of reasons which hath made him
voide of reason? unto the curious and laborious pursute of Sciences,
that have brought him unto sottishnesse? unto this rare aptitude to
the exercises of the minde, which hath made him without minde or
exercise? I rather spited than pitied him when I saw him at Ferrara,
in so piteous a plight, that he survived himselfe; misacknowledging
both himselfe and his labours, which unwitting to him, and even to his
face, have been published both uncorrected and maimed.  Will you have
a man healthy, will you have him regular, and in constant and safe
condition? overwhelme him in the darke pit of idlenesse and dulnesse.
We must be besotted ere we can become wise, and dazzled before we can
be led.  And if a man shall tell me that the commoditie to have the
appetite cold to griefes and wallowish to evils, drawes this
incommoditie after it, it is also consequently the same ----- 1
TORQUATO TASSO.

that makes us lesse sharpe and greedie to the enjoying of good and of
pleasures: It is true but the miserie of our condition beareth that we
have not so much to enjoy as to shun, and that extreme voluptuousnesse
doth not so much pinch us as a light smart: egnius homines bona quam
mala sentiunt:/1 'Men have a duller feeling of a good turne than of an
ill;' we have not so sensible a feeling of perfect health as we have
of the least sicknesse,'


  -----pungit

  In cute vix sumnma violatum plagula corpus


  Quando valere nihil quemquam movet.  Hoc juvat unum

  Quod me non torquet latus aut pes; caetera quisquam

  Vix queat aut sanum sese aut sentire valentem.

  A light stroke that dooth scarce the top-skin wound,

  Greeves the gall'd bodie, when in health to be,

  Doth scarce move any: onely ease is found.

  That neither side nor foot torementeth me:

  Scarce any in the rest can feel he's sound.

Our being in health is but the privation of being ill.  See therefore
where the sect of Philosophie that hath most preferred sensualitie,
hath also placed the same but to indolencie or unfeeling of paine.  To
have no infirmitie at all is the chiefest possession of health that
man can hope for (as Ennius said)

  Nimium boni est, cui nihil est mali.

  He hath but too much good,

  Whom no ill hath withstood.


For the same tickling and pricking which a man doth feel in some
pleasures, and seemes beyond simple health and indolencie, this active
and moving sensualitie, or as I may terme it, itching and tickling
pleasure, aymes but to be free from paine, as her chiefest scope.  The
lust-full longing which allures us to the acquaintance of women seekes
but to expell that paine which an earnest and burning desire doth
possesse us with, and desireth but to allay it thereby to come to rest
and be

----- 1 TIT.  LIV. 1. xxx. c. 21.

exempted from this fever; and so of others.  I say therefore, that
ifsimplicitie+ directeth us to have no evill, it also addresseth us
according to our condition to a most happy estate.  Yet ought it not
to be imagined so dull and heavie than the altogether senselesse.  And
Crantor had great reason to withstand the unsensiblenesse of Epicurus,
if it were so deeply rooted that the approching and birth of evils
might gainsay it.  I commend not that unsensiblenesse which is neither
possible nor to be desired.  I am well pleased not to be sicke, but if
I be, I will know that I am so; and if I be cauterized or cut, I will
feel it.  Verily, he that should root out the knowledge of evill
should therewithall extirp the knowledge of voluptuousnesse, and at
last bring man to nothing.  Istud nihil dolere, non sine magna mercede
contingit immanitatis in animo, stuporis in corpore:/1 'This verse
point, not to be offended or grieved with any thing, befals not freely
to a man without either inhumanitie in his minde or senselesnesse in
his bodie.'  Sicknesse is not amiss unto man, comming in her turne;
nor is he alwaies to shun pain, nor ever to follow sensualitie.  It is
a great advantage for the honour of ignorance that Science it selfe
throwes us into her armes when she findes her selfe busie to make us
strong against the assaults of evils: she is forced to come to this
composition: to yeeld us the bridle, and give us leave to shrowd our
selves in her lap, and submit ourselves unto her favour, to shelter us
against the assaults and injuries of fortune.  For what meaneth she
else when she perswades us to withdraw our thought from the evils that
possesse us, and entertains them with foregon pleasures, and stead us
as a comfort of present evils with the remembrance of forepast
felicities, and call a vanished content to our help, for to oppose it
against that which vexeth us?  Levationes, aegritudinum in avocatione
a cogitanda molestia, et revocatione ad contemplandas voluptates
ponit./2 'Eases of grief she reposeth either in calling from the
thought of offence, or calling to the contemplations of some
pleasures.  ----- 1 CIC.  Tusc.  Qu. 1. iii. 2 Ibid.

Unlesse it be that where force fails her, she will use policie and
shew a tricke of nimblenesse and turne away, where the vigor both of
her bodie and armes shall faile her.  For not onely to a strict
Philosopher, but simply to any setled man, when he by experience
feeleth the burning alteration of a hot fever, what currant paiment is
it to pay him with the remembrance of the sweetnesse of Greeke wine?
It would rather empaire his bargaine.

  Che ricordarsi il ben doppia la noia.

  For to thinke of our joy,

  Redoubles our annoy.

Of that condition is this other counsell, which Philosophie giveth
onely to keepe forepast felicities in memories and thence blot out
such griefes as we have felt: as if the skill to forget were in our
power: and counsell of which we have much lesse regard:

  Suavis est laborum praeteritorum memoria./1

  Of labours overpast,

  Remembrance hath sweet taste

What? shall Philosophie, which ought to put the weapons into my hands
to fight against Fortune; which should harden my courage, to suppress
and lay at my feet all humane adversities, will she so faint as to
make me like a fearfull cunnie creepe into some lurking-hole, and like
a craven to tremble and yeeld?  For memorie representeth unto us, not
what we chuse, but what pleaseth her.  Nay, there is nothing so deeply
imprinteth anything in our remembrance as the desire to forget the
same: it is a good way to commend to the keeping, and imprinteth
anything in our minde, to solicit her to lose the same. And that is
false, Est situm in nobis, ut et adversa quasi perpetua oblivione
obruamus, et secunda jucunde et suaviter eminerimus:/2 'This is
engraffed in us, or at least in our power, that we both burie in
perpetuall oblivion things past against

----- 1 CIC.  Fin. 1. ii.; Eurip. 2 CIC.  Fin.  Bon. 1. i.

us, and record with pleasure and delight what soever was for us.' And
this is true, Memini etiam quae nolo; oblivisci non possum quae
volo:/1 'I remember even those things I would not; and can not forget
what I would.' And whose counsell is this? his, Qui se unus sapientem
profiteri sit ausus:/1 'Who only durst professe himselfe a wise man'

  Qui genus humanum ingenio superavit, et omnes

  Praestrinaeit stellas, exortas uti aetherius Sol./2

  Who from all mankind bare for wit the prize,

  And dim'd the stars as when skies Sunne doth rise.

  To emptie and diminish the memorie, is it not the readie and onely
  way to ignorance?

  Iners malorum remedium ignorantia est./3

  Of ills a remedie by chance,

  And verie dull is ignorance.

We see diverse like precepts, by which we are permitted to borrow
frivolous appearances from the vulgar sort, where lively and strong
reason is not of force sufficient: alwaies provided they bring us
content and comfort. Where they can not cure a sore they are pleased
to stupifie and hide the same.  I am perswaded they will not denie me
this, that if, they could possibly add any order or constancie to a
mans life, that it might thereby be still maintained in pleasure and
tranquillitie, by or through any weaknesse or infirmitie of judgement,
but they would accept it.

  ----- potare, et spargere flores

  Incipiam, patiarque vel inconsultus haberi./4


  I will begin to strew flowers, and drinke free,

  And suffer witlesse, thriftlesse, held to bee.

There should many Philosophers he found of Lycas his opinion: This man
in all other things being very temperate and orderly in his demeanors,
living quietly

----- 1 EPIC. in CIC.  De Fin. 1. ii. 2 LUCR. 1. iii. 1086; EPICUR. 3
SEN. Oed. act iii. sc. 1. 4 HOR. 1. i.  Epist. iii. 14.

and contentedly with his families wanting of no dutie or office both
towards his own houshold and strangers, verie carefully preserving
himselfe from all hurtfull things: notwithstanding through some
alteration of his senses or spirits, he was so possessed with this
fantasticall conceipt or obstinate humour that he ever and continually
thought to be amongst the Theatres, where he still saw all manner of
spectacles, pastimes, sports and the best Comedies of the world.  But
being at last by the skill of Physitians cured of this maladie, and
his offending humour Purged, he could hardly be held from putting them
in suite, to the end they might restore him to the former pleasures
and contents of his imagination.

  ----- pol me occidistis amici,

  Non servastis, ait, cui sic extorta voluptas,

  Et demptus per vim menti gratissimus error./1

  You have not sav'd me, friends, but slaine me quite,

  (Quoth he) from whom so reft is my delight;

  And errour purg'd, which best did please my spright.


Of a raving like unto that of Thrasilaus, sonne unto Pythodorus, who
verily beleeved that all the ships that went out from the haven of
Pyraeus, yea and all such as came into it, did only travell about his
businesse, rejoycing when any of them had made a fortunate voyage, and
welcommed them with great gladnesse: His brother Crito, having caused
him to be cured and restored to his better senses, he much bewailed
and grieved of the condition wherein he had formerly lived in, such
joy, and so void of all care and griefe.  It is that which that
ancient Greeke verse saith: That not to be so advised brings many
commodities with it:

  'E Tp op--tim Yip inai, aL Tor/2

  The sweetest life I wis,

  In knowing nothing is. {ignorance=bliss+}



And as Ecclesiastes witnesseth: 'In much wisdome is much sorrow.  And
who getteth knowledge purchaseth sorrow and griefe' Even that which
Philosophy

----- 1 HOR. 1. i.  Epist. ii. 138. 2 SOPH.  Ala.  Flag.

doth in generall tearmes allow, this last remedy which she ordaineth
for all manner of necessities; that is, to make an end of that life
which we cannot endure. {Hemingway+} Placet? pare: placet? quacunque
vis exi. Pungit dolor? vel fodiat sane: si nudus es, da jugulum: sin
tectus armis vulcaniis, id est, fortitudine, resiste:/1 'Doth it like
you? obey: doth it not like you? get out as you will; doth griefe
pricke you? and let it pierce you too: if you be naked, yeeld your
throat: but if you be covered with the armour of Vulcan, that is, with
fortitude, resist.' And that saving, used of the Graecians in their
banquets, which they aply unto it, Aut bibat, aut abeat:/2 'Either let
him carouse, or carry him out of the house:' which rather fitteth the
mouth of a Gascoine, who very easily doth change the letter B into V,
than that of Cicero:

  Vivere si recte nescis, discede peritis:

  Lusisti satis, edisti satis, atque bibisti:

  Tempus abire tibi est, largius aequo

  Ridat, et pulset lascivia descentius aetas:/3

  Live well you cannot, them that can, give place; Well have you
  sported, eaten well, drunke well: 'Tis time you part; lest wanton
  youth with grace Laugh at, and knock you that with swilling dwell.

what is it but a confession of his insufficiency, and a sending one
backe not only to ignorance, there to be shrowded, but unto stupidity
it selfe, unto unsensiblenesse and not being?

  ----- Democritum postquam matura vetustas

  Admonuit memorem, motus lanquescere mentis.

  Sponte sua letho caput obvius obtulit ipse./4

  When ripe age put Democritus in minde,

  That his mindes motions fainted, he to finde

  His death went willing, and his life resign'd.

----- 1 CIC.  Tusc.  Qu. 1. ii. 2 CIC.  Ib. 1. v. 3 HOR. 1. ii.
Epist. ii. ult. 4 LUCR. 1. iii. 1083.

It is that which Anthisthenes said, that a man must provide himselfe
either of wit to understand or of a halter to hang himselfe: And that
which Chrysippus alleaged upon the speech of the Poet Tyrtaius,

  De la vertue, ou de mort approcher./1

  Or vertue to approch,

  Or else let death incroch.



And Crates said that love was cured with hunger, if not by time; and
in him that liked not these two meanes, by the halter. That Sextius,
to whom Seneca and Plutarke give so much commendation, having given
over all things else and betaken himselfe to the study of Philosophy,
seeing the progress of his studies so tedious and slow, purposed to
cast himself into the Sea; Ranne unto death for want of knowledge:
Reade here what the law saith upon the subject.  If peradventure any
great inconvenience happen, which cannot be remedied, the haven is not
farre-off, and by swimming may a man save himselve out of his bodie,
as out of a leaking boat: for it is feare to die, and not desire to
live, which keepes a foole ioyned to his body.  As life through
simplicity+ becommmeth more pleasant, so (as I erewhile began to say)
becommeth it more innocent and better.  The simple and the ignorant
(saith St.  Paul) raise themselves up to heaven, and take possession
of it; whereas we, with all the knowledge we have plunge ourselves
downe to the pit of hell.  I rely neither upon Valentian (a professed
enemy to knowledge and learning), nor upon Licinius (both-Roman
Emperours), who named them the venime and plague of all politike
estates: Nor on Mahomet, who, as I have heard, doth utterly interdict
all manner of learning to his subjects.  But the example of that great
Lycurgus and his authority, ought to beare chiefe sway and the
revernce of that divine Lacedemonian policy, so great, so admirable,
and so long time flourishing in all vertue and felicity without any
institution or exercise at all of letters.  Those who returne from

----- 1 PLUT. in Solon's Life.  AMYOT's Trans.

  Di citatorie piene e di libelli,

  Dessamine, e di carte, di procure

  Hanno mani e il seno, e gran fastelli

  Di chiose, di consioli e di letture,

  Per cui le faculta de' poverelli

  Non sono mai ne le citta sicure,

  Hanno dietro e dinanzi e d'ambi i lati,

  Notai, procuratori, e advocate./1

  Their hands and bosoms with writs and citations,

  With papers, libels, proxies, full they beare,

  And bundels great of strict examiunations,

  Of glosses, counsels, readings here and there.

  Whereby in townes poore men of occupations

  Possesse not their small goods secure from feare,

  Before, behind, on each sides Advocates,

  Proctors, and Notaries hold up debates. {pedants+} {lawyers+}

It was that which a Roman Senator said, that 'their predecessors had
their breath stinking of garlike, and their stomacke perfumed with a
good, conscience:' and contrary, the men of his time outwardly smelt
of nothing but sweet odours, but inwardly they stunke of all vices:
which, in mine opinion, is as much to say they had much knowledge and
sufficiency, but great want of honesty.  Incivility, ignorance,
simplicity+, and rudenesse are commonly joyned with
innocency. {PlainDealer+} Curiosity, subtility, and knowledge are ever
followed with malice: Humility, feare, obedience, and honesty (which
are the principall instruments for the preservation of humane society)
require a single docile soule and which presumeth little of her selfe:
{modesty+} Christians have a peculiar knowledge how curiosity is in a
man a naturall and originall infirmity.  The care to increase in
wisdome and knowledge was the first overthrow of

----- 1 ARIOSTO, cant. xiv. stan. 84.

man-kinde: is the way whereby man hath headlong cast himselfe downe
into eternall damnation. {original_sin+} Pride is his losse and
corruption: it is pride that misleadeth him from common waies; that
makes him to embrace all new fangles, and rather chuse to be chiefe of
a straggling troupe and in the path of perdition, and be regent of
some erroneous sect, and a teacher of falsehood, than a disciple in
the schoole of truth, and suffer himselfe to be led and directed by
the hand of others in the ready beaten highway. It is haply that which
the ancient Greeke proverb implieth, Seto-iaatuopia, Ka8a7rep 7rarp),
-r Tv(p,; sef9e7-at: 'Superstition obaieth pride as a father.  Oh
overweaning, how much doest thou hinder us?  Socrates being advertised
that the God of wisdome had attributed the name of wise unto him, was
thereat much astonished, and diligently searching and rouzing up
himselfe, and ransacking the very secrets of his heart, found no
foundation or ground for this divine sentence.  He knew some that were
as just, as temperate, as valiant and as wise as he, and more
eloquent, more faire and more profitable to their country.  In fine he
resolved that he was distinguished from others, and reputed wise,
onely because he did not so esteeme himselfe: And that his God deemed
the opinion of science and wisdome a singular sottishnes in man; and
that his best doctrine was the doctrine of ignorance, and simplicitie+
his greatest wisdome.  The sacred writ pronounceth them to be
miserable in this world that esteeme themselves. 'Dust and ashes,'
saith he, 'what is there in thee thou shouldest so much glory of?  And
in another place God hath made man like unto a shadowe, of which who
shall judge when, the light being gone, it shall vanish away?  Man is
a thing of nothing.  So far are our faculties from conceiving that
high Deitie, that of our Creators works, those beare his marke best,
and are most his owne, which we understand least.  It is an occasion
to induce Christians to beleeve, when they chance to meet with any
incredible thing, that it is so much the more according unto reason,
by how much more it is against humane reason.  If it were according
unto reason, it were no more a wonder; and were it to be matched, it
re no more singular. Melius scitur Deus nesciendo, 'God is better
knowen by our not knowing him,' saith S.  Augustine: and Tacitus,
Sanctius est ac reverentius de actis deorum credere quam scire:/1 'It
is a course of more holinesse and reverence to hold beleefe than to
have knowledge of Gods actions.' And Plato deemes it to be a vice of
impiety overcuriously to enquire after God, after the world, and after
the first causes of things. Atque illum quidem parentem hujus
universitatis invenire, difficile; et quum jam inveneris, indicare in
vulgus, nefas:/2 ''Both it is difficult to finde out the father of
this universe, and when you have found him, it is unlawfull to reveale
Him to the vulgar,' saith Cicero.  We easily pronounce puissance,
truth, and justice; they be words importing some great matter, but
that thing we neither see nor conceive.  We say that God feareth, that
God will be angry, and that God loveth.

  Immortalia mortali sermone notantes,/3

  Who with tearmes of mortality

  Note things of immortality.

They be all agitations and motions, which according to our forms can
have no place in God, nor we imagine them according to his.  It onely
belongs to God to know himselfe and interpret his owne workes; and in
our tongues he doth it improperly, to descend and come downe to us,
that are and lie groveling on the ground.  How can wisdome (which is
the choice betweene good and evill) beseeme him, seeing no evill doth
touch him?  How reason and intelligence, which we use to come from
obscure to apparant things, seeing there is no obscure thing in God?
Justice+, which distributeth unto every man what belongs unto him,
created for the society and conversation of man, how is she in

----- 1 TACITUS, Mor.  German. 2 CIC. de Univer.  Fragm. 3
LUCR. 1. v. 122.

God?  How, temperance+, which is the moderation of corporall
sensualities, which have no place at all in his God-head?  Fortitude+
patiently to endure sorrowes, and labours and dangers, appertaineth
little unto him, these three things no way approaching him, having no
accesse unto him.  And therefore Aristotle holds him to be equally
exempted from vertue and from vice. Neque gratia, neque ira teneri
potest, quod quae talia essent, imbecilla essent omnia:/1 'Nor can he
be possessed with favor and anger; for, all that is so is but weake.'
The participation which we have of the knowledge, of truth, what
soever she is, it is not by our owne strength we have gotten it; God
hath sufficiently taught it us in that he hath made choice of the
simple, common, and ignorant to teach us His wonderfull secrets.  Our
faith hath not been purchased by us: it is a gift proceeding from the
liberality of others.  It is not by our discourse or understanding
that we have received our religion, it is by a forreine authority and
commandement.  The weaknesse of our judgement helps us more than our
strength to compasse the same, and our blindnesse more than our
clear-sighted eies.  It is more by the meanes of our ignorance than of
our skill that we are wise in heavenly knowledge.  It is no marvell if
our naturall and terrestriall meanes cannot conceive the supernaturall
or apprehend the celestial knowledge.  Let us adde nothing of our own
unto it but obedience and subjection: for (as it is written) 'I will
confound the wisdome of the wise, and destroy the understanding of the
prudent.  Where is the wise? where is the scribe, where is the
disputer of this world? hath not God made the wisdome of this world
foolishuesse? For seeing the world by wisdome knew not God, in the
wisdome of God, it hath pleased Him, by the vanity of preaching, to
save them that beleeve. Yet must I see at last whether it be in mans
power to finde what he seekes for: and if this long search, wherein he
hath continued so many ages, hath enriched him with any new strength
or solid truth: I am perswaded, if be speake in

----- 1 CIC.  Nat.  Deor. 1. i. 2 1 COR. i. 19-21.

conscience, he will confesse that all the benefit he hath gotten by so
tedious a pursuit hath been that he hath learned to know his owne
weaknesse. That ignorance which in us was naturall, we have with long
study confirmed and averred.  It hath happened unto those that are
truly learned, as it hapneth unto eares of corne, which as long as
they are empty, grow and raise their head aloft, upright and stout;
but if they once become full and bigge with ripe corne, they begin to
humble and droope downeward.  So men having tried and sounded all, and
in all this chaos and huge heape of learning and provision of so
infinite different things, found nothing that is substantiall, firme,
and steadie, but all vanitie, have renounced their presumption, and
too late known their naturall condition. {Pope+} It is that which
Velleius upbraids Cotta and Cicero withall, that they have learnt of
Philo to have learned nothing.  Pherecydes, one of the seven wise men,
writing to Thales even as he was yeelding up the ghost, 'I have,'
saith he, 'appoynted my friends, as soon as I shal be layed in my
grave, to bring thee all my writings.  If they please thee and the
other sages, publish them; if not, conceale them.  They containe no
certainties nor doe they any whit satisfie mee.  My profession is not
to know the truth nor to attaine it.  I rather open than discover
things.  The wisest that ever was, being demanded what he knew,
answered, he knew that he knew nothing. He verified what some say,
that the greatest part of what we know is the least part of what we
know not: that is, that that which we thinke to know is but a parcel,
yea, and a small particle, of our ignorance. 'We know things in a
dreame' saith Plato, 'and we are ignorant of them in truth:. Omnes
pene veteres nihil cognosci, nihil percipi, nihil sciri posse dixerunt
angustos sensus, imbecilles animos, brevia curricula vitae:/1 'Almost
all the ancients affirmed nothing may be knowen, nothing perceived,
nothing understood: that our senses, are narrow, our mindes are weake,
and the race of our life is short.' Cicero himselfe, who ought

----- 1 CIC.  Acad.  Ou. 1. i.


all he had unto learning, Valerius saith, that in his age he begun to
disesteeme letters: and whilst he practised them, it was without bond
to any speciall body, following what seemed probable unto him, now in
the one and now in the other sect; ever holding himselfe under the
Academies doubtfulnesse.  Dicendum est, sed ita ut nihil affirmem;
quaeram omnia, dubitans plerumque, et mihi diffidens:/1 'Speake I
must, but so as I avouch nothing, question all things, for the most
part in doubt+ and distrust of my selfe.  I should have too much adoe
if I would consider man after his owne fashion, and in grose:' which I
might doe by his owne rule, who is wont to judge of truth, not by the
weight or value of voices, but by the number.  But leave we the common
people,

  Qui vigilans stertit,/2

  Who snoare while they are awake.

  Mortua cui vita est, prope jam vivo atque videnti:/3

  Whose life is dead while yet they see,

  And in a manner living be.

Who feeleth not himselfe, who judgeth not himselfe, who leaves the
greatest part of his naturall parts idle.  I will take man even in his
highest estate.  Let us consider him in this small number of excellent
and choice men, who having naturally beene endowed with a peculiar and
exquisite wit, have also fostred and sharpened the same with care,
with study and with art, and have brought and strained unto the
highest pitch of wisdome it may possibly reach unto.  They have fitted
their soule unto all senses, and squared the same to all byases; they
have strengthned and under-propped it with all foraine helpes, that
might any way fit or stead her, and have enriched and adorned her with
whatsoever they have beene able to borrow, either within or without
the world for her availe: It is in them that the extreme height of
humane nature doth lodge.  They have reformed the world with policies
and lawes.

----- 1 CIC.  Divin. 1. i. 2 LUCR. i. iii. 1091. 3 Ib. 1089.

They have instructed the same with arts and sciences, as also by
example of their wonderfull manners and life.  I will but make accompt
of such people, of their witnesse and of their experience.  Let us see
how far they have gone, and what holdfast they have held by.  The
maladies and defects which we shall finde in that college, the world
may boldly allow them to be his. Whosoever seekes for any thing,
commeth at last to this conclusion and saith, that either he hath
found it, or that it cannot be found, or that he is still in pursuit
after it.  All philosophy is divided into these three kindes.  Her
puprose is to seeke out the truth, the knowledge and the
certainty. The Peripatetike, the Epicureans, the Stoikes+ and others
have thought they had found it.  These have established the sciences
that we have, and as of certaine knowledges have treated of them;
Clitomachus, Carneades, and the Academikes have despaired the finding
of it, and judged that truth could not be conceived by our meanes.
The end of these is weaknesse and ignorance.  The former had more
followers and the worthiest sectaries.  Pyrrho and other sceptikes, or
epechistes, whose doctrine or manner of teaching many auncient learned
men have thought to have beene drawne from Homer, from the seaven wise
men, from Archilochus and Euripides, to whom they joyne Zeno,
Democritus, and Xenophanes, say that they are still seeking after
truth.  These judge that those are infinitely deceived who imagine
they have found it, and that the second degree is over boldly vaine in
affirming that mans power is altogether unable to attaine unto it.
For to establish the measure of our strength to know and distinguish
of the difficulty of things is a great, a notable and extreme science,
which they doubt whether man be capable thereof or no.

  Nil sciri quisquis putat, id quoque nescit,

  An sciri possit, quo se nil scire fatetur./1

  Who thinks nothing is knowne, knowes not that

  Whereby hee Grauntes he knowes nothing if it knowne may bee.


----- 1 LUCR. 1. iv. 471.

That ignorance which knoweth, judgeth, and condemneth it selfe, is not
an absolute ignorance: for to be so, she must altogether be ignorant
of her selfe.  So that the profession of the Pyrrhonians is ever to
waver, to doubt, and to enquire; never to be assured of any thing, nor
to take any warrant of himself.  Of the three actions or faculties of
the soule, that is to say, the imaginative, the concupiscible, and the
consenting, they allow and conceive the two former: the last they hold
and defend to be ambiguous, without inclination or approbation either
of one or other side, be it never so light.  Zeno in jesture painted
forth his imagination upon this division of the soules faculties: the
open and outstretched hand was apparance; the hand halfe-shut, and
fingers somewhat bending, consent; the fist closed, comprehension: if
the fist of the left hand were closely clinched together, it signified
Science.  Now this situation of their judgement, straight and
inflexible, receiving all objects with application or consent, leads
them unto their Ataraxie, which is the condition of a quiet and
settled life, exempted from the agitations which we receive by the
impression of the opinion and knowledge we imagine to have of things;
whence proceed feare, avarice, envie, immoderate desires, ambition,
pride, superstition, love of novelties, rebellion, disobedience,
obstinacie, and the greatest number of corporall evils: yea, by that
meane they are exempted from the jealousie of their owne discipline,
for they contend but faintly: they feare nor revenge nor contradiction
in the disputations.  When they say that heavy things descend
downward, they would be loth to be beleeved, but desire to be
contradicted, thereby to engender doubt and suspence of judgement,
which is their end and drift.  They put forth their propositions but
to contend with those they imagine wee hold in our conceipt.  If you
take theirs, then will they undertake to maintaine the contrarie all
is one to them, nor will they give a penny to chuse.  If you propose
that snow is blacke, they will argue on the other side that it is
white. lf you say it is neither one nor other, they will maintaine it
to be both.  If by a certaine judgement you say that you cannot tell,
they will maintaine that you can tell.  Nay, if by an affirmative
axiome you swear that you stand in some doubt, they will dupute that
you doubt not of it, or that you cannot judge or maintaine that you
are in doubt.  And by this extremitie of doubt, which staggereth it
selfe, they separate and divide themselves from many opinions, yea
from those which divers ways have maintained both the doubt and the
ignorance. Why shall it not be granted then (say they) as to
Dogmatists, or Doctrine-teachers, for one to say greene and another
yellow, so for them to doubt?  Is there any thing can be proposed unto
you, either to allow or refuse which may not lawfully be considered as
ambiguous and doubtfull?  And whereas others be carried either by the
custome of their countries or by the institution of their parents, or
by chance, as by a tempest, without choyce or judgement, yea sometimes
before the age of discretion, to such and such another opinion, to the
Stoike or Epicurean Sect, to which they finde themselves more engaged,
subjected, or fast tyed, as to a prize they cannot let goe: Ad
quamcunque disciplinam, velut Tempestate, delati, ad eam tanquam ad
saxum adhaerescunt: /1 'Being carried as it were by a Tempest to any
kinde of doctrine, they sticke close to it as it were to a rocke.' Why
shall not these likewise be permitted to maintaine their libertie and
consider of things without dutie or compulsion?Hoc liberiores et
solutiores, quod integra illis, est judicandi potestatas:/2'They are
so much the freer and at libertie, for that their power of judgement
is kept entire.' Is it not some advantage for one to finde himselfe
disengaged from necessitie which brideleth others: Is it not better to
remaine in suspence than to entangle himselfe in so many errours that
humane fantasia hath brought forth?  Is it not better for a man to
suspend his owne perswasion than to meddle with these sedicious and
quarrellous divisions?  What shall I chuse? Mary, what you list,

-----1 CIC.  Acad.  Qu. l. x. 2 Ibid.

soyoun chuse very foolish answer: to which it seemeth nevertheless
that all Dogmatisme arriveth; by which it is not lawfull for you to
bee ignorant of that we know not.  Take the best and strongest side,
it shall never be so sure but you shall have occasion to defend the
same, to close and combat a hundred and a hundred sides?  Is it not
better to keepe out of this confusion? You are suffered to embrace as
your honour and life Aristotles opinion upon the eternitie of the
Soule, and to belie and contradict whatsoever Plato saith concerning
that; and shall they be interdicted to doubt of it?  If it be lawfull
for Panaecius to maintaine his judgement about auspices, dreames,
oracles, and prophecies, whereof the Stoikes make no doubt at all:
wherfore shall not a wise man dare that in all things which this man
dareth in such as he hath learned of his masters, confirmed and
established by the general consent of the schoole whereof he is a
sectary and a professor? If it be a childe that judgeth, he wots not
what it is; if a learned man, he is forestalled.  They have reserved a
great advantage for themselves in the combat, having discharged
themselves of the care how to shroud themselves. They care not to be
beaten, so they may strike againe: and all is fish that comes to net
with them.  If they overcome, your proposition halteth; if you, theirs
is lame; if they faile, they verifie ignorance; if you, she is
verified by you; if they prove that nothing is knowen, it is very
well; if they cannot prove it, it is good alike: Vt quum in eadem re
paria contrariis in partibus momenta inveniuntur, facilius ab utraque
parte assertio sustineatur;/1 XXXX 'So as when the same matter the
like weight and moment is found on divers parts, we may the more
easily hold with avouching on both parts.' And they suppose to find
out more easily why a thing is false than true, and that which is not
than that which is: and what they beleeve not, than that what they
beleeve.  Their manner of speech is, 'I confirme nothing. It is no
more so than thus, or neither: I

----- 1 CIC.  Acad.  Qu. 1. x

conceive it not; apparances are every where alike.  The law of
speaking pro or contra is all one. 'Nothing seemeth true that may not
seeme false. Their sacramental word is c7rcXco; which is as much to
say as I hold and stir not.  Behold the burdens of their songs and
other such like.  Theyr effects is a pure, entire, and absolute
surceasing and suspence of judgement. They use their reason to enquire
and to debate, and not to stay and choose. Whosoever shall imagine a
perpetuall confession of ignorance, and a judgement upright and
without staggering, to what occasion soever may chance, that man
conceives the true Pyrrhonisme.  I expound this fantazy as plaine as I
can, because many deeme it hard to be conceived: and the authors
themselves represent it somewhat obscurely and diversly.  Touching the
actions of life, in that they are after the common sort, they are lent
and applied to naturall inclinations, to the impulsion and constraint
of passions, to the constitutiones of lawes and customes, and to the
tradition of arts: Non enim nos Deus ista scire, sed tantummodo uti
voluit:/1 'For God would not have us know these things, but only use
them.' By such meanes they suffer their common actions to be directed
without any conceit or judgement, which is the reason that I cannot
well sort unto this discourse what is said of Pyrrho.  They faine him
to be stupide and unmovable, leading a kinde of wild and unsociable
life, not shunning to be hit with carts, presenting himselfe unto
downefalls, refusing to conforme himselfe to the lawes.  It is an
endearing of his discipline.  Hee would not make himselfe a stone or a
blocke, but a living, discoursing, and reasoning man, enjoying all
pIeasures and naturall commodities, busying himselfe with and using
all his corporall and spirituall parts in rule and right.  The
fantasticall and imaginary and false privileges which man hath usurped
unto himselfe to sway, to appoint, and to establish, he hath
absolutely renounced and quit them.  Yet is there no Sect but is
enforced to allow her wise Sectary, in chiefe to follow ----- 1 CIC.
Divin. 1. i.

diverse things nor comprehended, nor perceived, nor allowed, if he
will live.  And if he take shipping, he follows his purpose, not
knowing whether it shall be profitable or no: and yeeldes to this,
that the ship is good, the pilote is skilfull, and that the season is
fit, circumstances only probable.  After which he is bound to goe and
suffer himselfe to be removed by apparances, alwaies provided they
have no expresse contrariety in them. Hee hath a body, he hath a
soule, his senses urge him forward, his minde moveth him.  Although he
finde not this proper and singular marke of judging in himselfe, and
that he perceive he should not engage his consent seeing some
falsehood may be like unto this truth: hee ceaseth not to conduct the
offices of his life fully and commodiously.  How many arts are there
which professe to consist more in conjecture than in the science; that
distinguish not betweene truth and falsehood, but only follow seeming?
There is both true and false (say they), and there are meanes in us to
seeke it out, but not to stay it when we touch it.  It is better for
us to suffer the order of the world to manage us without further
inquisition. A mind warranted from prejudice hath a marvellous
preferment to tranquillity. Men that censure and controule their
judges doe never duly submit unto them.  How much more docile and
tractable are simple and uncurious mindes found both towards the lawes
of religion and Politike decrees, than these over-vigilant and nice
wits, teachers of divine and humane causes?  There is nothing in mans
invention wherein is so much likelybood, possibilities and profit.
This representeth man bare and naked, acknowledging his naturall
weaknesse, apt to receive from above some strange power, disfurnished
of all humane knowledge, and so much the more fitte to harbour divine
understanding, disannulling his judgement, that so he may give more
place unto faith. Neither misbeleeving nor establishing any doctrine
or opinion repugnant unto common lawes and observances, humble,
obedient, disciplinable and studious; a sworne enemy to Heresie, and
by consequence exempting himselfe from all vaine and irreligious
opinions, invented and brought up by false Sects.  It is a white sheet
prepared to take from the finger of God what form so ever it shall
please him to imprint therein.  The more we addresse and commit our
selves to God, and reject our selves, the better it is for us.  Accept
(saith Ecclesiastes) in good part things both in shew and taste, as
from day to day they are presented unto thee, the rest is beyond thy
knowledge. Dominus novit cogitationes hominum, quoniam vanae sunt:/1
'The Lord knowes the thoughts of men, that they are vayne.'  See how
of three generall Sects of Philosophie, two make expresse profession
of doubt and ignorance and in the third, which is the Dogmatists, it
is easie to be discerned that the greatest number have taken the face
of assurance; onely because they could set a better countenance on the
matter.  They have not so much gone about to establish any certainty
in us, as to shew how farre they had waded in seeking out the truth.

  Quam docti fingunt magis quam norunt: 'Which the learned doe rather
  conceit than know.'


Timaeus, being to instruct Socrates of what he knowes of the Gods, of
the world, and of men, purposeth to speake of it as one man to
another; and that it sufficeth, if his reasons be as probable as
another mans.  For exact reasons are neither in his hands, nor in any
mortall man; which one of his Sectaries hath thus imitated: Vt potero,
explicabo: nec tamen, ut Pythius Apollo, certa ut sint et fixa quae
dixero; sed ut homunculus, probabilia conjectura sequens:/2 'As I can,
I will explaine them; yet not as Apollo giving oracles, that all
should bee certaine and set downe, that I say but as a meane man who
followes likelihood by his conjecture.' And that upon the discourse of
the contempt of death; a naturall and popular discourse.  Elsewhere he
hath translated it, upon Platoes very words: Si forte, de Deorum
natura ortuque mundi disserentes, minus id quod habemus in animo
consequimur,

----- 1 Psalm xcii. 11. 2 CIC.  Tusc.  Qu. 1. i.


haud erit mirum.  AEquum est enim meminisse, et me, qui disseram,
hominem esse, et vos qui judicetis: ut, si probabilia dicentur, nihil
ultra requiratis/1 'It will be no marvell if arguing of the nature of
Gods and originall of the world, we scarcely reach to that which in
our minde we comprehend; for it is meet we remember that both I am a
man who am to argue, and you who are to judge, so as you seeke no
further, if I speake but things likely.' Aristotle ordinarily hoardeth
us up a number of other opinions and other beleefes, that so he may
compare his unto it, and make us see how farre he hath gone further,
and how neere he comes unto true-likelyhood. For truth is not judged
by authorities nor by others testimonie.  And therefore did Epicurus
religiously avoyd to aleadge any in his compositions.  He is the
Prince of Dogmatists, and yet we learne of him that, to know much
breedes an occasion to doubt more.  He is often seene seriously to
shelter himselfe under so inextricable obscurities that his meaning
cannot be perceived. In effect, it is a Pyrrhonisme under a resolving
forme.  Listen to Ciceroes protestation, who doth declare us others
fantasies by his owne.Qui requirunt, quid de quaque re ipsi sentiamus;
curiosius id faciunt, quam necesse est. Haec in Philosophia ratio
contra omnia disserendi, nullamque rem aperte judicandi, profecta a
Socrate, repetita ab Arcesila, confirmata a Carneade, usque ad nostram
viget aetatem.  Hi sumus, qui omnibus veris falsa quaedam adiuncta
esse dicamus, tanta similitudine, ut in iis nulla insit certe
judicandi et assentiendi nota:/2 'They that would know what we conceit
of everything, use more curiosity than needs.  This course in
Philosophy to dispute against all things, to judge eexpressly of
nothing, derived from Socrates, renewed by Arcesilas, confirmed by
Carneades, is in force till our time: we are those that aver some
falsehood entermixt with every truth, and that with such likenesses as
there is no set note in those things for any assuredly to give
judgement or assent.' Why hath not Aristotle alone, but the -- --- 1
CIC.  Univers. 2 CIC.  Nat.  Deor. 1. i.

greatest number of Philosophers, affected difficulty, unlesse it be to
make the vanity of the subject to prevaile, and to ammuse the our
curiosity of our minde, seeking to feed it by gnawing so raw and bare
a bone?  Clytomachus affirmed that he could never understand by the
writings of Carneades, what opinion he was of.  Why hath Epicurus
interdicted facility unto his Sectaries? And wherefore hath Heraclitus
beene surnamed O'KOTCiV S, 'a darke mysty crowded fellow'?  Difficulty
is a coine that wise men make use of, as juglers doe with passe and
repasse, because they will not display the vanity of their art, and
wherewith humane foolishnesse is easily apaid.

  Clarus ob obscuram linguam, magis inter inanes,

  Omnia enim stolidi magis admirantur amantgue.

  Inversis quae sub verbi; latitantia cernunt./1

  For his darke speech much prais'd, but of th' unwise;

  For fooles doe all still more admire and prize

  That under words turn'd topsie-turvie lies.

Cicero reproveth some of his friends because they were wont to bestow
more time about astrology, law, logike, and geometry, than such arts
could deserve; and diverted them from the devoirs of their life, more
profitable and more honest.  The Cyrenaike philosophers equally
contemned naturall philosophy and logicke. {PlainDealer+} Zeno in the
beginning of his bookes of the Commonwealth declared all the liberall
sciences to be unprofitable. {PlainDealer+} Chrysippus aid,.that which
Plato and Aristotle had written of logike, they had written the same
in jest and for exercise sake, and could not beleeve that ever they
spake in good earnest of so vaine and idle a subject.  Plutarke saith
the same of the metaphysikes: Epicurus would have said it of
rhetorike, of grammar, of poesie, of the mathematikes, and (except
naturall philosophy of all other sciences: and Socrates of all, but of
the art of civill manners and life. {PlainDealer+} Whatsoever he was
demanded of any man, he would ever first enquire of him to give an
accompt of his life, {selfcriticism+} both present and past, which he
would --- --1 LUCR. 1. i. 636.  seriously examine and judge of;
deeming all other apprentiships as subsequents and of supererogation
in regard of that Parum mihi placeant ex literae quae ad virtutem
doctoribus nihil profuerunt: 'That learning pleaseth me but a little,
which nothing profiteth the teachers of it unto vertue.  Most of the
arts have thus beene contemned by knowledge it selfe, for they thought
it not amisse to exercise their mindes in matters wherein was no
profitable solidity. {PlainDealer+} As for the rest, some have judged
Plato a dogmatist, others a doubter; some a dogmatist in one thing,
and some a doubter in another.  Socrates, the fore-man of his
Dialogues doth ever aske and propose his disputation; yet never
concluding, nor ever satisfying, and saith he hath no other science
but that of opposing.  Their author, Homer, hath equally grounded the
foundations of all sects of philosophy, thereby to shew how
indifferent he was which way he went.  Some say that of Plato arose
ten diverse sects.  And as I thinke, never was instruction wavering
and nothing avouching if his be not.  Socrates was wont to say that
when midwives begin once to put in practice the trade to make other
women bring forth children, themselves become barren.  That be, by the
title of wise, which the gods had conferred upon him, had also in his
man-like and mentall love shaken off the faculty of begetting: Being
well pleased to afford all helpe and favor to such as were
engenderers; to open their nature, to suple their passages, to ease
the issue of their child-bearing, to judge thereof, to baptise the
same, to foster it, to strengthen it, to swathe it, and to circumcise
it, exercising and handling his instrument at the perill and fortune
of others.  So is it with most authors of this third kinde, as the
ancients have well noted by the writings of Anaxagoras, Democritus,
Parmenides, Xenophanes, and others.  They have a manner of writing
doubtfull both in substance and intent, rather enquiring than
instructing: albeit here and there they enterlace their stile with
dogmaticall cadences.  And is not that as well seene in Seneca and in
Plutarke?  How much doe they speake sometimes of one face and
sometimes of another, for such as looke neere unto it?  Those who
reconcile lawyers, ought first to have reconciled them every one unto
himselfe.  Plato hath (in my seeming) loved this manner of
philosophying dialogue wise in good earnest, that thereby he might
more decently place in sundry mouthes the diversity and variation of
his owne conceits.  Diversly to treat of matters is as good and better
as to treat them conformably; that is to say, more copiously and more
profitably.  Let us take example by our selves.  Definite sentences
make the last period of dogmaticall and resolving speech; yet see wee
that those which our Parliaments present unto our people as the most
exemplare and fittest to nourish in them the reverence they owe unto
this dignitie, especially by reason of the sufficiencie of those
persons which exercise the same, taking their glory, not by the
conclusion, which to them is dayly, and is common to al judges as much
as the debating of diverse and agitations of contrary reasonings of
law causes will admit. And the largest scope for reprehensions of some
Philosophers against others, draweth contradictions and diversities
with it, wherein every one of them findeth himself so entangled,
either by intent to show the wavering of mans minde above all matters,
or ignorantly forced by the volubilitie and incomprehensiblenesse of
all matters: What meaneth this burden?  In a slippery and gliding
place let us suspend our beliefe.  For as Euripides saith, Les oeuvres
de Dieu en diverges Facons, nous donnent des traverses.  Gods workes
doe travers our imaginations, And crosse our workers in divers
different fashions.  Like unto that which Empedocles was wont often to
scatter amongst his bookes, as moved by a divine furie and forced by
truth.  No, no, we feel nothing, we see nothing; all things are hid
from us; there is not one that we may establish, how and what it is.
But returning to this holy word,Cogitatione mortalium timidae, et
incertae adinventiones nostrae, et providentiae/1 The thoughts of
mortal men are feareful, our devices and foresights are uncertaine.
It must not be thought strange if men disparing of the goale have yet
taken pleasure in the chase of it; studie being in itselfe a pleasing
occupation, yea so pleasing that amid sensualities the Stoikes forbid
also that which comes from the exercise of the minde, and require a
bridle to it, and finde intemperance in over much knowledge.
Democritus having at his table eaten some figges that tasted of hony,
began presently in his minde to seeke out whence this unusuall
sweetness in them might proceed; and to be resolved, rose from the
board, to view the place where those figges had beene gathered. His
maide servant noting this alteration in her master, smilingly said
unto him, that he should no more busie himselfe about it; the reason
was, she had laide them in a vessell where hony had beene; whereat he
seemed to be wroth in that shee had deprived him of the occasion of
his intended search, and robbed his curiositie of matter to worke
upon. 'Away,' quoth he unto her, 'thou hast much offended mee; yet
will I not omit to finde out the cause, as if it were naturally so.
Who perhaps would not have missed to finde some likely or true reason
for a false and supposed effect.  This storie of a famous and great
Philosopher doth evidently represent unto us this studious passion,
which so doth ammuse us in pursuit of things, of whose obtaining wee
despaire.  Plutarke reporteth a like example of one who would not be
resolved of what he doubted, because hee would not lose the pleasure
hee had in seeking it: As another, that would not have his Physitian
remove the thirst he felt in his ague, because he would not lose the
pleasure he tooke in quenching the same with drinking. Satius est
supervacua discere, quam nihil:/2 It is better to learne more than wee
need than nothing at all.  Even as in all feeding, pleasure is alwayes
alone and single ----- 1 Wisd. ix. 14. 2 SEN.  Epist. lxxxix.

and all we take that is pleasant is not ever nourishing and wholesome:
So likewise, what our minde drawes from learning leaveth not to be
voluptuous, although it neither nourish nor be wholesome.  Note what
their saying is: 'The consideration of nature is a food proper for our
mindes, it raiseth and puffeth us up, it makes us by the comparison,
of heavenly and high things to disdaine base and low matters.  The
search of hidden and great causes is very pleasant, yea unto him that
attaines nought but the reverence and feare to judge of them.  These
are the very words of their profession. The vaine image of this crazed
curiositie is more manifestly seen in this other example, which they
for honour-sake have so often in their mouths. Eudoxus wished, and
praid to the Gods, that he might once view the Sunne neere at hand, to
comprehend his forme, his greatnesse and his beautie: on condition he
might immediately be burnt and consumed by it.  Thus with the price of
his owne life would he attaine a Science, whereof both use and
possession shall therewith bee taken from him; and for so sudden and
fleeting knowledge lose and forgoe all the knowledges he either now
hath, or ever hereafter may have.  I can not easily be perswaded that
Epicurus, Plato, or Pythagoras have sold us their atomes, their ideas
and their numbers for ready payment.  They were over wise to establish
their articles of faith upon things so uncertaine and disputable.  But
in this obscuritie and ignorance of the world, each of these notable
men hath endeavoured to bring some kinde of shew or image of light;
and have busied their mindes about inventions that might at least have
a pleasing and wilie apparance, provided (notwithstanding it were
false) it might be maintained against contrary oppositions: Vnicuiquce
ista pro ingenio finguntur, non ex Scientiae vi: 'These things are
conceited by every man as his wit serves, not as his knowledge
stretches and reaches. An ancient Phylosopher being blamed for
professing that Philosophie, whereof in his judgement bee made no
esteeme; answered, that that was true Philosophizing.  They have gone
about to consider all, to ballance all, and have found that it was an
occupation fitting the naturall curiositie which is in us.  Some
things they have written for the behoofe of common societie, as their
religions: And for this consideration was it reasonable that they
would not throughly unfold common opinions, that so they might not
breed trouble in the obedience of lawes and customes of their
countries.  Plato treateth this mysterie in a very manifest kinde of
sport.  For, where he writeth according to himselfe, he prescribeth
nothing for certaintie: When he institutes a Law giver, he borroweth a
very swaying and avouching kinde of stile: Wherein he boldly
entermingleth his most fantasticall opinions; as profitable to
perswade the common sort, as ridiculous to perswade himselfe: Knowing
how apt wee are to receive all impressions, and chiefly the most
wicked and enormous. And therefore is he very carefull in his lawes
that nothing bee sung in publike but Poesies the fabulous fictions of
which tend to some profitable end: being so apt to imprint all manner
of illusion in man's minde, that it is injustice not to feed them
rather with commodious lies, than with lies either unprofitable or
damageable.  He flatly saith in his Common-wealth that for the benefit
of men, it is often necessarie to deceive them.  It is easie to
distinguish how some Sects have rather followed truth, and some
profit; by which the latter have gained credit.  It is the miserie of
our condition that often what offers it selfe unto our imagination for
the likelyst, presents not it selfe unto it for the most beneficiall
unto our life.  The boldest sects, both Epicurean, Pirrhonian and new
Academike, when they have cast their accompt are compelled to stoope
to the civill law.  There are other subjects which they have tossed,
some on the left and some on the right hand, each one labouring and
striving to give it some semblance, were it right or wrong: For,
having found nothing so secret, whereof they have not attempted to
speak, they are many times forced to forge divers feeble and fond
conjectures : Not that themselves tooke them for a ground- worke, not
to establish a truth, but for an exercise of their studie.  Non tam id
sensisse, quod dicerent, quam exercere ingenia materiae difficultate
videntur voluisse. 'They seem not so much to have thought as they
said, as rather willing to exercise their wits in the difficulty of
the matter.  And if it were not so taken, how should we cloke so great
an inconstancie, varietie and vanity of opinions, which wee see to
have beene produced by these excellent and admirable spirits?  As for
example, What greater vanitie can there be than to goe about by our
proportions and conjectures to guess at God?  And to governe both him
and the world according to our capacitie and lawes? And to use this
small scantlin of sufficiencie, which he hath pleased to impart unto
our naturall condition, at the cost and charges or divinitie? And
because we cannot extend our sight so farre as his glorious throne, to
have removed him downe to our corruption and miseries?  Of all humane
and ancient opinions concerning religion, I thinke that to have had
more likelyhood and excuse, which knowledged and confessed God to be
an incomprehensible power, chiefe beginning and preserver of all
things; all goodness, all perfection; accepting in good part the
honour and reverence which mortall men did yeeld him, under what
usage, name and manner soever it was.

  Iupiter omnipotens rerum, regumque, Deumque,

  Progenitor, genitrixque./1

  Almightie love is parent said to be

  Of things, of Kings, of Gods, both he and she.

This zeale hath universally beene regarded of heaven with a gentle and
gracious eye.  All policies have reaped some fruit by their devotion;
Men and impious actions have every where had correspondent events.

----- 1 VALERIUS SORANUS, quoted from VARRO by AUGUSTIN, De Civ.  Dei.

Heathen histories acknowledge dignitie, order, justice, prodigies, and
oracles, employed for their benefit and instruction in their fabulous
religion: God of hismercy daining, peradventure, to foster by his
temporal blessings the budding and tender beginnings of such
bruteknowledge as naturall reason gave them of him athwart the false
images of their deluding dreames: Not only false but impious and
injurious are those which man hath forged and devised by his owne
invention.  And of all religions Saint Paul found in credit at Athens,
that which they had consecrated onto a ccrtaine hidden and unknowne
divinitie seemed to be most excusable.  Pythagoras shadowed the truth
somewhat neerer, judgeing that the knowledge of this first cause and
Ensentium must be undefined, without any prescription or
declaration. That it was nothing else but the extreme indevour of our
imagination toward perfection, every one amplifying the idea thereof
according to his capacitie. But if Numa undertooke to conforme the
devotion of his people to this project, to joyne the same to a
religion meerely mental without any prefixt object or materiall
mixture, he undertooke a matter to no use.  Mans minde could never be
maintained if it were still floting up and downe in this infinite
deepe of shapeles conceits.  They must be framed onto her to some
image according to her model.  The majesty of God hath in some sort
suffered itself to be circumscribed to corporall limits: His
supernaturall and celestiall Sacraments beare signes of our
terrestriall condition.  His adoration is exprest by offices and
sensible words; for it is man that beleeveth and praieth.  I omit
other arguments that are employed about this subject.  But I could
hardly be made beleeve that the sight of our Crucifixes and pictures
of that pittiful torment, that the ornaments and ceremonious motions
in our Churches, that the voyces accomodated and suted to our
thoughts-devotions, and this stirring of our senses, doth not greatly
inflame the peoples soules with a religious passion of wonderous
beneficiall good.  Of those to which they have given bodies, as
necessity required amid this generall blindnesse, as for me; I should
rather have taken part with those who worshipped the Sunne.

  -----la lumiere comnune,

  L'ail du monde; et si Dieu au chef porte des yeux,


  Les rayons du Soleil sont ses yeux radieux

  Qui donnent vie a tous, nous maintiennent et gardent,

  Et les faicts des humains en ce monde regardent:

  Ce beau, ce grand Soleil, qui nous fait les saysons,

  Selon qu'il entre ou sort de ses douze maysons:

  Qui remplit l'univers de ses vertus cognues,

  Qui d'un traict de ses yeux nous dissipe les nues:

  L'espirit, l'ame du monde, ardent et flamboyant,

  En la course d'un iour tout le Ciel tournoyant,

  Plein d'immense grandeur, rond, vagabond et ferme:

  Lequel tient dessoubs luy tout le monde pour terme,

  En repos sans repos, oysif, et sans seiour,

  Fils aisne de Nature, et le Pere du iour.

  The common light,

  The worlds eye: and if God beare eyes in his cheefe head,

  His most resplendent eyes the Sunne-beames may be said,

  Which unto all give life, which us maintaine and guard,

  And in this world of men, the workes of men regard:

  This great, this beauteous Sunne, which us our seasons makes,

  As in twelve houses be ingresse or egresse takes;

  Who with his Vertues knowne, doth fill this universe,

  With one cast of his eyes doth us all clowds disperse:

  The spirit, and the soule of this world, flaming, burning,

  Round about heav'n in course of one dayes journey turning.

  Of endlesse greatnesse full, round, moveable and fast:

  Who all the world for bounds beneath himselfe hath pla'st:

  In rest, without rest, and still more staid, without stay,

  Of Nature th' eldest Childe, and Father of the day.

Forasmuch as besides this greatnesse and matchlesse beautie of his, it
is the onely glorious piece of this vaste worlds frame, which we
perceive to be furthest from us: And by that meane so little knowne as
they are pardonable, they entered into admiration and reverence of
it. Thales, who was the firstto enquire and find out this matter,
esteemed God to be a spirit who made all things of water.  Anaximander
thought the Gods did dy, and were new borne at divers seasons, and
that the worlds were infinite in number.  Anaximenes deemed the ayre
to be a God, which was created immense and always moving.  Anaxagoras
was the first that held the description and manner of all things to be
directed by the power and reason of a spirit infinite Alcmaeon hath
ascribed divinity unto the Sunne, unto the Moone, unto Stars, and unto
the Soule.  Pythagoras hath made God a spirit dispersed through the
Nature of all things, whence our soules are derived.  Parmenides, a
circle circumpassing the heavens, and by the heat of light maintaining
the world.  Empedocles said the four Natures, whereof all things are
made, to be Gods.  Protagoras, that he had nothing to say whether they
were or were not, or what they were.  Democritus would sometimes say
that the images and their circuitions were Gods, and othertimes this
Nature, which disperseth these images, and then our knowledge and
intelligence.  Plato scattereth his beliefe after diverse semblances.
In his Timaeus he saith that the worlds father could not be named.  In
his Lawes that his being must not be enquired after.  And elsewhere in
the said bookes he maketh the world, the heaven, the starres, the
earth, and our soules, to be Gods; and besides, admitteth those that
by ancient institutions have beene received in every commonwealth.
Xenophon reporteth a like difference of Socrates his
discipline. Sometimes that Gods forme ought not to be inquired after;
then he makes him infer that the Sunne is a God, and the Soule a God;
othertimes that there is but one, and then more.  Speusippus, Nephew
unto Plato, makes God to be a certaine power, governing all things,
and having a soule.  Aristotle saith sometimes that it is the spirit,
and sometimes the world; othertimes he appoynteth another ruler over
this world, and sometimes he makes God to be the heat of heaven.
Xenocrates makes eight; five named amongst the planets, the sixth
composed of all the fixed starres, as of his owne members; the
seaventh and eighth the Sunne and the Moone.  Heraclides Ponticus doth
but roame among his opinions, and in fine depriveth God of sense, and
maks him remove and transchange himselfe from one forme to another;
and then saith that is both heaven and earth.  Theophrastus in all his
fantasies wandereth still in like irresolutions, attributing the
worlds superintendency now to the intelligence, now to the heaven, and
now to the starres.  Strabo, that it is Nature having power to
engender, to augment and to diminish, without forme or sense.  Zeno,
the naturall Law, commanding the good and prohibiting the evill; which
Lawe is a breathing creature, and removeth the accustomed Gods,
Iupiter, Iuno, and Vesta.  Diogenes Apolloniates, that it is Age.
Xenophanes makes God round, seeing, hearing not breathing, and having
nothing common with humane Nature.  Aristo deemeth the forme of God to
bee incomprehensible, and depriveth him of senses, and wotteth not
certainely whether he bee a breathing soule or something else.
Cleanthes, sometimes reason, othertimes the World; now the soule of
Nature, and other-while the supreme heat, enfoulding and containing
all.  Perseus, Zenoes disciple, hath beene of opinion that they were
surnamed Gods who had brought some notable good or benefit unto humane
life, or had invented profitable things. Chrysippus made a confused
huddle of all the foresaid sentences, and amongst a thousand formes of
the Gods which he faineth, hee also accompteth those men that are
immortalized.  Diagoras and Theodorus flatly denied that there were
anie Gods: Epicurus makes the Gods bright-shining, transparent, and
perflable, placed as it were betweene two Forts, betweene two Worlds,
safely sheltered from all blowes, invested with a humane shape, and
with our members, which unto them are of no use.

  Deum genus esse semper duxi, et dicam caelitum, Sed eos non curare
  opinor, quid agat humanum genus./1

  I still thought and wil say, of Gods there is a kinde;


  But what Our mankinde doth, I thinke they nothing minde.

-----1 ENN. in CIC.  De Div. 1. ii.


Trust to your Philosophie, boast to have hit the naile on the head; or
to have found out the beane of this cake, to see this coile and
hurly-burly of so many Philosophical wits.  The trouble or confusion
of worldly shapes and formes hath gotten this of mee, that customes
and conceipts differing from mine doe not so much dislike me as
instruct me; and at what time I conferre or compare them together,
they doe not so much puffe me up with pride as humble me with
lowlinesse+.  And each other choyce, except that which commeth from
the expresse hand of God, seemeth to me a choyce of small prerogative
or consequence The worlds policies are no less contrarie one to
another in this subject than the schooles whereby we may learne that
Fortune herself is no more divers, changing, and variable, than our
reason, nor more blinde and inconsiderat. Things most unknowne are
fittest to be deified.  Wherefore to make Gods of our selves (as
antiquitie hath done), it exceeds the extreme weaknesse of discourse.
I would rather have followed those that worshipped the Serpent, the
Dogge, and the Ox, forsomuch as their Nature and being is least knowne
to us, and we may more lawfully imagine what we list of those beasts,
and ascribe extraordinarie faculties unto them.  But to have made Gods
of our conditions, whose imperfections we should know, and to have
attributed desire, choler, revenge, marriages, generation, alliances,
love, and jealousie, our limbs and our bones, our infirmities, our
pleasures, our deaths, and our sepulchres unto them hath of necessity
proceeded from a meere and egregious sottishness or drunkennesse of
mans wit.

  Quae procul usque adeo divino ab numine distant.

  Ingue Deum numero quae sint indigna videri./1

  Which from Divinity so distant are,

  To stand in ranks of Gods unworthy farre.

Formae, aetates, vestitus ornatus noti sunt: genera, conjugia,
cognationes, omniaque traducta ad similitudinem imbecillitatis
humanae: nam et perturbatis animis

----- 1 LUCR. 1. v. 123.

inducuntur; accipimus enim Deorum cupiditates aegritudines,
iracundias: 'Their shapes, their ages, their aparrell, their
furnitures are knowen; their kindes, their marriages, their kindred,
and all translated to the likenesse of man's weaknesse: For they are
also brought in with mindes much troubled; for we read of the
lustfulnesse, the grievings, the angrinesse of the Gods.  As to have
ascribed Divinity, not only unto faith, vertue, honour, concord,
liberty, victory and piety; but also unto voluptuousnesse, fraud,
death, envy, age and misery; yea unto feare, unto ague, and unto evill
fortune, and such other industries and wrongs to our fraile and
transitory life:

  Quid juvat hoc, templis nostros inducere mores?

  O curvae in terris animae et caelestium inanes!/1

  What boots it, into Temples to bring manners of our kindes?

  O crooked soules on earth, and void of heavenly mindes.


The Aegyptians, with an impudent wisdome forbad, upon a of hanging,
that no man should dare to say that Serapis and Isis, their Gods, had
whilome beene but men, when all knew they had been so. And their
images or pictures drawne with a finger acrosse their mouth imported
(as Varro saith) this misterious rule unto their priests, to conceal
their mortall off-spring, which by necessary reason disannuled all
their veneration. Since man desired so much to equall himselfe to God,
it had beene better for him (saith Cicero) to draw those divine
conditions unto himselfe, and bring them downe to earth, than to send
his corruption and place his misery above in heaven; but to take him
aright, he hath divers wayes, and with like vanitie of opinion, doth
both the one and other.  When Philosophers blazon and display the
Hierarchy of their gods, and to the utmost of their skill endevour to
distinguish their aliances, their charges, and their powers; I cannot
beleeve they speake in good earnest.  When Plato decyphreth unto us
the orchard of Pluto, and the commodities or corporall paines which
even after the ruine

----- 1 PERS.  Sat. ii. 62, 61.

  and consumption of our body waite for us, and applyeth them to the
  apprehension or feeling we have in this life;

  Secreti celant colles, et myrtea circum

  Sylva tegit, curae non ipsa in morte relinquunt;/1

  Them paths aside conceale, a mirtle grove

  Shades them round; cares in death doe not remove;

when Mahomet promiseth unto his followers a paradise all tapestried,
adorned with gold and precious stones, peopled with exceeding
beauteous damsels, stored with wines and singular cates: I well
perceive they are but scoffers which sute and apply themselves unto
our foolishness, thereby to enhonny and allure us to these opinions
and hopes fitting our mortall appetite. Even so are some of our men
falne into like errours by promising unto themselves after their
resurrection a terrestriall and temporal life accompanied with all
sorts of pleasures and worldly commodities.  Shall we thinke that
Plato, who had so heavenly conceptions and was so well acquainted with
Divinity as of most he purchased the surname of Divine, was ever of
opinion that man (this seely and wretched creature man) had any one
thing in him which might in any sort he applied and suted to this
incomprehensible and unspeakable power? or ever imagined that our
languishing hold-fasts were capable, or the vertue of our
understanding of force, to participate or be partakers either of the
blessednesse or eternal punishment?  He ought in the behalfe of humane
reasoned he answered: If the pleasures thou promisest us in the other
life are such as I have felt here below, they have nothing in them
common with infinity. if all my five naturall senses were even
surcharged with joy and gladnesse, and my soule possessed with all the
contents and delights it could possibly desire or hope for (and we
know what it either can wish or hope for) yet were it nothing.  If
there bee any thing that is mine, then is

----- 1 VIRG.  AEn. 1. vi. 443.

there nothing that is Divine; if it be nothing else but what may
appertaine unto this our present condition, it may not be accounted
of.  All mortall mens contentment is mortall.  The acknowledging of
our parents, of our children and of our friends, if it cannot touch,
move or tickle us in the other world, if we still take hold of such a
pleasure, we continue in terrestrial and transitorie commodities.  We
can not worthily conceive of these high, mysterious, and divine
promises, if wee can but in any sort conceive them, and so imagine
them aright; they must be thought to be immaginable, unspeakeable and
incomprehensible, and absolutely and perfectly other than those of our
miserable experience. 'No eye can behold (saith Saint Paul) the hap
that God prepareth for his elect, nor can it possibly enter the heart
of man.' /1 And if to make us capable of it (as thou saist, Plato, by
thy purifications), our being is reformed and essence changed, it must
be by so extreme and universall a change that, according to
philosophicall doctrine, wee shall be no more ourselves:

  Hector erat tunc cum belle certabat, at ille

  Tractus ab AEmonio non erat Hector equo./2

  Hector he was, when he in fight us'd force;

  Hector he was not, drawne by th'enemics horse.

  it shall be some other thing that shall receive these recompences.


  -----quod mutatur, dissolvitur; interit ergo:

  Trajiciuntur enim partes atgue ordine migrant./3


  What is chang'd is dissolved, therefore dies:

  Translated parts in order fall and rise.

For in the Metempsychosis or transmigration of soules of Pythagoras,
and the change of habitation which he imagined the soules to make,
shall we thinke that the lion in whom abideth the soule of Caesar,
doth wed the passions which concerned Caesar, or that it is

----- 1 1 COR. ii. 9. 2 OVID.  Trist. 1. iii.; El. xi. 27. 3
LUCR. 1. iii. 781.

bee?  And if it were hee, those had some reason who, debating this
opinion against Plato, object that the sonne might one day bee found
committing with his mother under the shape of a Mules body, and such
like absurdities. And shall wee imagine that in the transmigrations
which are made from the bodies of some creatures into others of the
same kind, the new succeeding ones are not other than their
predecessors were?  Of a Phenixes cinders, first (as they say) is
engendred a worme and then another Phenix: who can imagine that this
second Phenix be no other and different from the first? Our
Silk-wormes are seene to dye and then to wither drie, and of that body
breedeth a Butter-flie, and of that a worme, were it not ridiculous to
thinke the same to be the first Silkeworm? what hath once lost its
being is no more.

  Nec si materiam nostram collegerit aetas

  Post obitum, rursumque redegerit, ut sita nunc est,

  Atque iterum nobis fuerint data lumina vitae,

  Pertineat quidquam tamen ad nos id quoque factum,

  Interrupta semel cum sit repetentia nostra./1

  If time should recollect, when life is past,

  Our stuffe, and it replace, as now 'tis plac't,

  And light of life were granted us againe,

  Yet nothing would that deed to us pertaine,

  When interrupted were our turne againe.

And Plato, when in another place thou saist that it shall be the
spirituall part of man that shall enjoy the recompences of the other
life, thou tellest of things of as small likely- hood.

  Scilicet avulsus radicibus ut nequit ullam

  Dispicere ipse oculus rem, seorsum corpore toto./2

  Ev'n as no eye, by th' root's pull'd out, can see

  Ought in whole body severall to bee.

  For by this reckoning it shall no longer be man, nor consequently
  us, to whom this enjoyment shall


----- 1 LUCR. 1. iii. 890. 2 Ib. 580.

  appertaine; for we are built of two principall essential parts, the
  separation of which is the death and consummation of our being.

  Inter enim jecta est vitai pausa vageque

  Deerrarunt passim motus ab sensibus omnes./1

  A pause of life is interpos'd; from sense

  All motions straied are, far wandring thence.

  We doe not say that man suffereth when the wormes gnaw his body and
  limbs whereby he lived, and that the earth consumeth them:

  Et nihil hoc ad nos, qui coitu conjugioque

  Corporis atque animae consistimus uniter apti./2

  This nought concerns us, who consist of union

  Of minde and body joyn'd in meet communion.

Moreover, upon what ground of their justice can the Gods reward man
and be thankfull unto him after his death, for his good and vertuous
actions, since themselves addressed and bred them in him?  And
wherefore are they offended and revenge his vicious deeds, when
themselves have created him with so defective a condition, and that
but with one twinkling of their will they may hinder him from sinning?
Might not Epicurus with some shew of humane reason object that unto
Plato, if he did not often shrowd himselfe under this sentence, that
it is impossible by mortall nature to establish any certainty of the
immortall?  Shee is ever straying but especially when she medleth with
divine matters.  Who feeles it more evidently than we?  For, although
we have ascribed unto her assured and infallible Principles, albeit
wee enlighten her steps with the holy lampe of that truth which God
hath been pleased to impart unto us, we notwithstanding see daily, how
little soever she stray from the ordinary path that she start or
stragle

----- 1 LUCR. 1. iii. 903. 2 Ib. 888.

out of the way traced and measured out by the Church, how soone she
loseth, entangleth and confoundeth her selfe; turning, tossing and
floating up and downe in this vast, troublesome and tempestuous sea of
mans opinions without restraint or scope.  So soone as she loseth this
high and common way, shee divideth and scattereth herselfe a thousand
diverse ways.  Man can be no other than he is, nor imagine but
according to his capacity. It is greater presumption (saith Plutarch
in them that are but men, to attempt to reason and discourse of Gods
and of demi-Gods, than in a man meerly ignorant of musicke to judge of
those that sing; or for a man that was never in warres to dispute of,
Armes and warre, presuming by some light conjecture to comprehend the
effects of an art altogether beyond his skill. As I thinke, Antiquity
imagined it did something for divine Majesty when shee compared the
same unto man, attiring her with his faculties, and enriching her with
his strange humours and most shamefull necessities: offering her some
of our cates to feed upon, and some of our dances, mummeries, and
enterludes to make her merry, with our clothes to apparrell her, and
our houses to lodge her, cherishing her with the sweet odors of
incense, and sounds of musicke, adorning her with garlands and
flowers, and to draw her to our vicious passion, to flatter her
justice with an inhuman revenge, gladding her with the ruine and
dissipation of things created and preserved by her.  As Tiberius
Sempronius, who for a sacrifice to Vulcan caused the rich spoiles and
armes which he had gotten of his enemies in Sardinia to be burned: And
Paulus Emilius, those he had obtained in Macedonia, to Mars and
Minerva.  And Alexander, comming to the Ocean of India, cast in favour
of Thetis many great rich vessels of gold into the Sea, replenishing,
moreover, her Altars with a butcherly slaughter, not onely of innocent
beasts, but of men, as diverse Nations, and amongst the rest, ours
were wont to doe. And I thinke none hath beene exempted from shewing
the like Essayes.

  -----Sulmone creatos

  Quatuor hic juvenes, totidem, quos educat Usens,


  Viventes rapit, inferias quos immolet umbris./1

  Foure young-men borne of Sulmo, and foure more

  Whom Usens bred, he living over-bore,

  Whom he to his dead friend

  A sacrifice might send.

The Getes deeme themselves immortall, and their death but the
beginning of a journey to their God Zamolxis.  From five to five
yeares they dispatch some one among themselves toward him, to require
of him necessarie things.  This deputy of theirs is chosen by lots;
and the manner to dispatch him, after they have by word of mouth
instructed him of his charge, is that amongst those which assist his
election, three hold so many javelins upright, upon which the others,
by meere strength of armes, throw him; if he chance to sticke upon
them in any mortall place, and that he dye suddenly, it is to them an
assured argument of divine favour; but if he escape, they deeme him a
wicked and execrable man, and then chuse another.  Amestris, mother
unto Xerxes, being become aged, caused at one time fourteen young
striplings of the noblest houses of Persia (following the religion of
her countrie) to be buried all alive, thereby to gratifie some God of
under earth.  Even at this day the Idols of Temixitan are cemented
with the bloud of young children, and love no sacrifice but of such
infant and pure soules: Oh justice, greedy of the blood of innocencie.

  Tantum religio portuit suadere malorum./2

  Religion so much mischeefe could

  Perswade, where it much better should.


The Carthaginians were went to sacrifice their owne children unto
Saturne, and who had none was faine to buy some: and their fathers and
mothers were enforced in their proper persons, with cheerefull and
pleasant countenance to assist that office.  It was a

----- 1 VIRG.  AEn. 1. x.517. 2 LUCR. 1. i. 102.

strange conceit, with our owne affliction to goe about to please and
appay divine goodnesse: As the Lacedemonians, who flattered and
wantonized their Diana by torturing of young boys, whom often in
favour of her they caused to be whipped to death.  It was a savage
kinde of humour to thinke to gratifie the Architect with the
subversion of his Architecture, and to cancel the punishment due unto
the guiltie by punishing the guiltles, and to imagine that poore
Iphigenia, in the port of Aulis, should by her death and sacrifice
discharge and expiate towards God, the Grecians armie of the offences
which they had committed.

  Et casta inceste nubendi tempore in ipso

  Hostia concideret mactatu maesta parentis./1

  She, a chaste offring, griev'd incestuously

  By fathers stroke, when she should wed,to dye.

And those two noble and generous soules of the Decii, father and
sonne, to reconcile and appease the favour of the Gods towards the
Romanes affaires, should headlong cast their bodies athwart the
thickest throng of their enemies.  Quae fuit tanta Deorum iniquitas,
ut placari populo Romano non possint, nisi tales viri occidissent?/2
'What injustice of the Gods was so great as they could not be appeased
unlesse such men perished?  Considering that it lies not in the
offender to cause himselfe to be whipped, how and when he list, but in
the judge, who accompteth nothing a right punishment except the
torture he appointeth and cannot impute that unto punishment which is
in the free choice of him that suffereth.  The divine vengeance
presupposeth our full dissent, for his justice and our paine.  And
ridiculous was that humor of Polycrates, the Tyrant of Samos, who, to
interrupt the course of his continuall happinesse, and to recompence
it, cast the richest and most precious jewell he had into the Sea,
deeming that by this purposed mishap he should satisfie the revolution
and vicissitude of fortune; which, to deride his folly, caused, the
very same jewel,

----- 1 LUCR. 1. i. 99. 2 CIC.  De Nat.  Deor. 1. iii. 6.


being found in a fishes belly, to returne to his hands againe.  And to
what purpose are the manglings and dismembrings of the Corybantes, of
the Maenades, and now a dayes of the Mahumetans, who skar and gash
their faces, their stomacke and their limbes, to gratifie their
prophet: seeing the offence consisteth in the will not in the breast,
nor eyes, nor in the genitories, health, shoulders, or throat?  Tantus
est perturbatae mentis et sedibus suis pulsae furor, ut sic Dii
placentur, quemadmodum ne homines quidem saeviunt:/1 'So great is the
fury of a troubled minde put from the state it should be in, as the
Gods must be so pacified, as even men would not be so outrageous.'
This naturall contexture doth by her use not only respect us, but also
the service of God and other mens: it is injustice to make it miscarie
at our pleasure, as under what pretence soever it be to kill our
selves.  It seemeth to be a great cowardise and manifest treason to
abuse the stupide and corrupt the servile functions of the body, to
spare the diligence unto the soule how to direct them according unto
reason.  Vbi iratos Deos timent, qui sic propitios habere merentur.
In regiae libidinis voluptatem castrate sunt quidam; sed nemo sibi, ne
vir esset, jubente Domino manus intulit:/2 'Where are they afeard of
Gods anger, who in such sort deserve to have his favour; some have
beene guelded for Princes lustfull pleasure; but no man at the Lords
command hath laid hands on himselfe to be lesse than a man.' Thus did
they replenish their religion and stuffe it with divers bad effects.

  -----saepius olim

  Religio peperit scelerosa atque impia facta./3



  Religion hath oft times in former times

  Bred execrable facts, ungodly crimes,

Now can nothing of ours, in what manner soever, be either compared or
referred unto divine nature, that doth not blemish and defile the same
with as much imperfection.  How can this infinite beauty, power, and

----- 1 AUG.  Civ.  Dei. 1. vi. c. 10. 2 Ib. ex SEN. 3 LUCR. 1. i. 82.

goodnes admit any correspondencie or similitude with a thing so base
and abject as we are, without extreme interest, and manifest
derogation from his divine greatnesse? Infirmum Dei fortius est
hominibus; et stultum Dei sapientius est hominibus:/1 The weaknesse of
God is stronger than man; and the foolishnesse of God is wiser than
men.  Stilpo the Philosopher being demanded whether the Gods rejoyce
at our honours and sacrifices; you are indiscreet (said he), let us
withdraw our selves apart if you, speake of such matters.
Notwithstanding we prescribe him limits, we lay continuall siege unto
his power by our reasons. (I call our dreames and our vanities reason,
with the dispensation of Philosophy, which saith that both the foole
and the wicked doe rave and dote by reason, but that it is a reason of
severall and particular forme.) We will subject him to the vaine and
weake apparances of our understanding: him who hath made both us and
our knowledge.  Because nothing is made of nothing: God was not able
to frame the world without matter.  What? hath God delivered into our
hands the keyes, and the strongest wards of his infinit puissance?
Hath he obliged himselfe not to exceed the bounds of our knowledge?
Suppose, oh man, that herein thou hast beene able to marke some signes
of his effects.  Thinkest thou he hath therein employed all he was
able to doe, and that he hath placed all his formes and ideas in this
peece of worke?  Thou seest but the order and policie of this little
cell wherein thou art placed.  The question is, whether thou seest it.
His divinitie hath an infinit jurisdiction far beyond that.  This
peece is nothing in respect of the whole. {Pope+}

  -----omnia cum caelo terraque marique,

  Nil sunt ad summam summai totius omnem./2


  All things that are, with heav'n, with sea, and land,

  To th' whole summe of th' whole summe as nothing stand.

This law thou aleagest is but a municipall law, and thou knowest not
what the universall is: tie thy

----- 1 COR. i. 25. 2 LUCR. 1. vi. 675.

selfe unto that whereto thou art subject, but tie not him: he is
neither thy companion, nor thy brother, nor thy fellow citizen, nor
thy copesmate. If lie in any sort have communicated himselfe unto
thee, it is not to debase himselfe, or stoope to thy smalnesse, nor to
give thee the controulment of his power.  Mans body cannot soare up
into the clouds, this is for thee. The sunne uncessantly goeth his
ordinary course the bounds of the seas and of the earth cannot be
confounded: the water is ever fleeting, wavering, and without
firmnesse: a wall without breach or flaw, impenetrable unto a solid
body: man cannot preserve his life amidst the flames, he cannot
corporally be both in heaven and on earth, and in a thousand places
together and at once.  It is for thee that be hath made these rules:
it is thou they take hold of.  He hath testified unto Christians that
when ever it hath pleased him he hath out gone them all.  And in
truth, omnipotent as he is, wherefore should he have restrained his
forces unto a limited measure? In favour of whom should be have
renounced his privilege?  Thy reason hath in no one other thing more
likely-hood and foundation, than in that which perswadeth thee a
plurality of words.

  Terramque et solem, lunam, mare, caetera quae sunt,

  Non esse unica, sed numero magis innumerali./1

  The earth, the sunne, the moone, the sea and all

  In number numberlesse, not one they call.

The famousest wits of former ages have beleeved it, yea and some of
our moderne, as forced thereunto by the apparance of humane reason.
For as much as whatsoever eye see in this vast worlds frame, there is
no one thing alone, single and one.

  ----- cum in summa res nulla sit una,

  Unica quae gignatur, et unica solaque crescat:


  Whereas in generall summe, nothing is one,

  To be bred only one, grow only one.

  And that all severall kindes are multiplied in some


----- 1 LUCR. 1. ii. 1094. 2 Ib. 1086.

number: whereby it seemeth unlikely that God hath framed this peece of
work alone without a fellow: and that the matter of this forme hath
wholy beene spent in this only Individuum.

  Quare etiam atqae etiam tales fateare necesse est,

  Esse alios alibi congressus matiriae,

  Qualis hic est avidi complexu quem tenet AEther./1

  Wherefore you must confesse, againe againe,

  Of matters such like meetings elsewhere raigne

  As this, these skies in greedy gripe containe.

Namely, if it be a breathing creature, as its motions make it so
likely, that Plato assureth it, and divers of ours either affirme it,
or dare not impugne it; no more than this old opinion, that the
heaven, the starres, and other members of the world, are creatures
composed both of body and soule; mortall in respect of their
composition, but immortall by the Creators decree.  Now if there be
divers worlds, as Democritus, Epicurus, and well neere all Philosophy
hath thought; what know wee whether the principles and the rules of
this one concerns or touch likewise the others?  Haply they have
another semblance and another policie. Epicurus imagineth them either
like or unlike.  We see an infinite difference and varietie in this
world only by the distance of places.  There is neither corne nor
wine, no nor any of our beasts seene in that new corner of the world
which our fathers have lately discovered: all things differ from ours.
And in the old time, marke but in how many parts of the world they had
never knowledge nor et Bacchus nor of Ceres.  If any credit may be
given unto Plinie or to Herodotus, there is in some places a kinde of
men that have very little or no resemblance at all with ours.  And
there be mungrell and ambiguous shapes betweene a humane and brutish
nature.  Some countries there are where men are borne headlesse, with
eyes and mouths in their breasts; where all are Hermaphrodites; where
they creepe on all foure;

----- 1 LUCR. 1. ii. 1073.

where they have but one eye in their forehead, and heads more like
unto a dog than ours; where from the navill downewards they are half
fish and live in the water; where women are brought a bed at five
years of age, and live but eight; where their heads and the skin of
their browes are so hard that no yron can pierce them, but will rather
turne edge; where men never have beards.  Other nations there are that
never have use of fire; others whose sperme is of a blacke colour.
What shall we speake of them who natarally change themselves into
woolves, into coults, and then into men againe?  And if it bee (as
Plutark saith) that in some part of the Indiaes there are men without
mouthes, and who live only by the smell of certaine sweet odours; how
many of our descriptions be then false?  Hee is no more risible, nor
perhaps capable of reason and societie.  The direction and cause of
our inward frame should for the most part be to no purpose.  Moreover,
how many things are there in our knowledge that oppugne these goodly
rules which we have allotted and prescribed unto Nature?  And we
undertake to joyne God himselfe unto her.  How many things doe we name
miraculous and against Nature?  Each man and every nation doth it
according to the measure of his ignorance.  How many hidden
proprieties and quintessences doe we daily discover?  For us to go
according to Nature, is but to follow according to our understanding,
as far as it can follow, and as much as we can perceive in it.
Whatsoever is beyond it, is monstrous and disordered.  By this accompt
all shall then be monstrous, to the wisest and most sufficient; for
even to such humane reason hath perswaded that she had neither ground
nor footing, no not so much as to warrant snow to be white: and
Anaxagoras said it was blacke.  Whether there be anything or nothing;
whether there be knowledge or ignorance, which Metrodorus Chius denied
that any man might say; or whether we live, as Euripides seemeth to
doubt and call in question; whether the life we live be a life or no,
or whether that which we call death be a life:

  T'Is' 8'o,'d.y c, C o 0' 5 xgkkn,.t O.",..

  T6 th@ 8@ O@4aKe,. g@,,;/1

  Who knowes if thus to live, be called death,

  And if it be to dye, thus to draw breath;

And not without apparance.  For wherefore doe we from that instant
take a title of being, which is but a twinkling in the infinit course
of an eternall night, and so short an interruption of our perpetuall
and naturall condition?  Death possessing what ever is before and
behind this moment, and also a good part of this moment.  Some others
affirme there is no motion, and that nothing stirreth; namely, those
which follow Melissus.  For if there be but one, neither can this
sphericall motion serve him, nor the moving from one place to another,
as Plato proveth, that there is neither generation nor corruption in
nature.  Protagoras saith there is nothing in nature but doubt: that a
man may equally dispute of all things: and of that also, whether aall
things may equally be disputed of: Nausiphanes said, that of things
which seeme to be, no one thing is nno more than it is not.  That
nothing is certaine but uncertainty.  Parmenides, that of that which
seemeth there is no one thing in generall.  That there is but one
Zeno, that one selfe same is not: and that there is nothing. If one
were, he should either be in another, or in himselfe: if he be in
another, then are they two: if he be in himselfe, they are also two,
the comprising and the comprised.  According to these rules or
doctrines, the Nature of things is but a false or vaine shadow.  I
have ever thought this manner of speech in a Christian is full of
indiscretion and irreverence; God cannot dye, God cannot gaine-say
himselfe, God cannot doe this or that. I cannot allow a man should so
bound Gods heavenly power under the Lawes of our word.  And that
apparence, which in these propositions offers it selfe unto us, ought
to be represented more reverently and more religiously. Our speech
hath his infirmities and defects, as all things else have.  Most

----- 1 PLAT.  Gorg. ex EURIP.

of the occasions of this worlds troubles are Grammaticall.  Our suits
and processes proceed but from the canvasing and debating the
interpretation of the Lawes, and most of our warres from the want of
knowledge in State-counsellors, that could not cleerely distinguish
and fully expresse the Covenants and Conditions of accords betweene
Prince and Prince.  How many weighty strifes and important quarels
hath the doubt of this one sillable, hoc, brought forth in the world?
Examine the plainest sentence that Logike it selfe can present unto
us.  If you say, it is faire weather, and in so saying, say true, it
is faire weather then.  Is not this a certaine forme of speech? Yet
will it deceive us: That it is so, let us follow the example: If you
say, I lye, and in that you should say true, you lie then.  The Art,
the reason, the force of the conclusion of this last, are like unto
the other; notwithstanding we are entangled.  I see the Pyrrhonian
philosophers, who can by no manner of speech expresse their generall
conceit: for they had need of a new language.  Ours is altogether
composed of affirmative propositions, which are directly against them.
So that when they say I doubt, you have them fast by the throat to
make them avow that at least you are assured and know that they doubt.
So have they beene compelled to save themselves by this comparison of
Physicke, without which their conceit would be inexplicable and
intricate.  When they pronounce, I know not, or I doubt, they say that
this proposition transportes it selfe together with the rest, even as
the Rewbarbe doeth, which scowred ill humours away, and therewith is
carried away himselfe.  This conceipt is more certainly conceived by
an interrogation: What can I tell?  As I beare it in an Imprese of a
paire of ballances.  Note how some prevaile with this kinde of
unreverent and unhallowed speech. In the disputations that are
nowadayes in our religion, if you overmuch urge the adversaries, they
will roundly tell you that it lieth not in the power of God to make
his body at once to be in Paradise and on earth, and in many other
places together.  And how that ancient skoffer made profitable use of
it.  At least (saith he) it is no small comfort unto man to see that
God cannot doe all things; for he cannot kill himselfe if he would,
which is the greatest benefit we have in our condition; he cannot make
mortall men immortall nor raise the dead to life againe, nor make him
that hath lived never to have lives, and him who hath had honours not
to have had them, having no other right over what is past, but of
forgetfulnesse.  And that this society betweene God and Man may also
be combined with some pleasant examples, he cannot make twice ten not
to be twenty.  See what, he saith, and which a Christian ought to
abhor, that ever such and so profane words should passe his mouth:
Whereas, on the contrary part, it seemeth that fond men endevour to
finde out this foolish-boldnesse of speech, that so they may turne and
winde God almighty according to their measure.

  -----cras vel atra

  Nube polum pater occupato,


  Vel sole puro, non tamen irritum

  Quodcumque retro est efficiet, neque

  Diffinget effectumque reddet

  Quod fugiens semel hora vexit./1

  Tommorrow let our father fill the skie,

  With darke cloud, or with cleare Sunne, he thereby

  Shall not make voyd what once is overpast:

  Nor shall he undoe, or in new mold cast,

  What time hath once caught, that flyeth hence so fast.

When we say that the infinite of ages, as well past as to come, is but
one instant with God; that his wisdome, goodnesse and power, are one
selfe-same thing with his essence; our tongue speaks it, but our
understanding can no whit apprehend it.  Yet will our selfe
overweening sift his divinitie through our sieve: whence are
engendered all the vanities and errours wherewith this world is so
full-fraught, reducing and weighing with his uncertaine balance a
thing so farre from his

----- 1 HOR.  Car. 1. iii.  Od. xxix. 43.

  reach, and so distant from his weight. Mirum quo procedat improbitas
  cordis humani, parvulo aliquo invitata successu./1

'It is a wonder whither the perverse wickednesse of mans heart will
proceed, if it be but called-on with any little successes.' {Yahoo+}
How insolently doe the Stoikes charge Epicurus, because he holds that
to be perfectly good and absolutely happy belongs but only unto God;
and that the wise man hath but a shadow and similitude thereof?  How
rashly have they joyned God unto destiny? (Which at my request, let
none that beareth the surname of a Christian doe at this day.) And
Thales, Plato, and Pythagoras have subjected him unto necessities.
This over- boldnesse, or rather bold-fiercenesse, to seeke to discover
God by and with our eyes, hath beene the cause that a notable man of
our times hath attributed a corporall forme unto divinitie, and is the
cause of that which daily hapneth unto us, which is by a particular
assignation to impute all important events to God: which because they
touch us, it seemeth they also touch him, and that he regardeth them
with more care and attention than those that are but slight and
ordinary unto us. Magna dii curant, parva negligunt:/2 'The Gods take
some care for great things, but none for little.' Note his example; he
will enlighten you with his reason. Nec in regnis quidem reges omnia
minima curant:/3 'Nor doe Kings in their Kingdomes much care for the
least matters.' As if it were all one to that King, either to remove
an Empire or a leafe of a tree: and if his providence were otherwise
exercised, inclining or regarding no more the successe of a battell
than the skip of a flea.  The hand of his government affords itselfe
to all things after a like tenure, fashion and order; our interest
addeth nothing unto it: our motions and our measures concerne him
nothing and move him no whit.  Deus ita artifex magnus in magnis, ut
minor non sit in parvis: 'God is so great a workman in great things,

----- 1 PLIN.  Nat.  Hist. 1. ii, c. 23. 2 CIC.  Nat.  Deor. 1. ii. 3
Ib. 1. iii.

as he is no lesse in small things.  Our arrogancie setteth ever before
us this blasphemous equality, because our occupations charge us.
Strato hath presented the Gods with all immunitie of offices, as are
their Priests. He maketh nature to produce and preserve all things,
and by her weights and motions to compact all parts of the world,
discharging humane nature from the feare of divine judgments. Quod
beatum aeternumque sit, id nec habere, negotii quicquam, nec exhibere
alteri;/1 'That which is blessed and eternall, nor is troubled it
selfe, nor troubleth others.' Nature willeth that in all things alike
there be also like relation.  Then the infinite number of mortall men
concludeth a like number of immortall: The infinite things that kill
and destroy presuppose as many that preserve and profit.  As the
soules of the Gods, sanse tougues, sanse eyes, and sanse eares, have
each one, in themselves a feeling of that which the other feel, and
judge of our thoughts; so mens soules, when they are free and severed
from the body, either by sleepe or any distraction, divine,
prognosticate and see things, which being conjoyned to their bodies,
they could not see. Men, saith Saint Paul,/2 when they professed
themselves to be wise, they became fooles, for they turned the glory
of the incorruptible God to the similitude of the image of a
corruptible man.  Marke, I pray you, a little the iugling of ancient
Deifications.  After the great, solemne and prowd pompe of funerals,
when the fire began to burne the top of the Pyramis, and to take hold
of the bed or hearce wherein the dead corps lay, even at that instant
they let fly an Eagle, which taking her flight aloft upward, signified
that the soule went directly to Paradise.  We have yet a thousand
medailes and monuments, namely, of that honest woman Faustina, wherein
that Eagle is represented carrying a cocke- horse up towards heaven
those deified soules.  It is pity we should so deceive our selves with
our owne foolish devises and apish inventions,

----- 1 CIC.  Nat.  Deor. 1. i. 2 Rom i. 22, 23.

  Quod finxere timent,/1

  Of that they stand in feare,

  Which they in fancie beare,

as children will be afeard of their fellowes visage, which themselves
have besmeared and blackt.  Quasi quicquam infaelicius sit homine, cui
sua figmenta dominantur: 'As though any thing were more wretched than
man over whom his owne imaginations beare sway and domineere.  To
honour him whom we have made is farre from honouring him that hath
made us.  Augustus had as many Temples as Iupiter and served with as
much religion and opinion of miracles. The Thracians, in requitall of
the benefits they had received of Agesilaus, came to tell him how they
had canonized him. 'Hath your Nation,' said he, 'the power to make
those whom it pleaseth Gods?  Then first (for example sake) make one
of your selves, and when I shall have seene what good he shall have
thereby, I will then thanke you for your offer.  Oh sencelesse man,
who cannot possibly make a worme, and yet will make Gods by
dozens. Listen to Trismegistus when he praiseth our sufficiencie: For
man to finde out divine nature, and to make it, hath surmounted the
admiration of all admirable things.  Loe here arguments out of
Philosophies schooles itselfe.

  Noscere cui Divos et coeli numina soli,

  Aut soli nescire datum./2

  Only to whom heav'ns Deities to know,

  Only to whom is giv'n, them not to know.

If God be, he is a living creature; if he be a living creature, he
hath sense; and if he have sense, he is subject to corruption.  If he
be without a body, he is without a soule, and consequently without
action: and if he have a body, he is corruptible.  Is not this brave?
We are incapable to have made the world, then is there some more
excellent nature that hath set her

----- 1 LUCAN. 1. i. 484. 2 Ib. 462.

helping hand unto it.  Were it not a sottish arrogancie that wee
should thinke ourselves to be the perfectest thing of this universe?
Then sure there is some better thing.  And that is God.  When you see
a rich and stately mansion house, although you know not who is owner
of it, yet will you not say that it was built for rats.  And this more
than humane frame and divine composition, which we see, of heavens
pallace, must we not deeme it to be the mansion of some Lord greater
than our selves?  Is not the highest ever the most worthy?  And we are
seated in the lowest place.  Nothing that is without a soule and void
of reason is able to bring forth a living soule capable of reason.
The world doth bring us forth, then the world hath both soule and
reason.  Each part of us is lesse than our selves, we are part of the
world, then the world is stored with wisdome and with reason, and that
more plenteously than we are.  It is a goodly thing to have a great
government.  Then the worlds government belongeth to some blessed and
happy nature.  The Starres annoy us not, then the Starres are full of
goodnesse. We have need of nourishment, then so have the Gods, and
feed themselves with the vapours arising here below.  Worldly goods
are not goods unto God. Then are not they goods unto us.  To offend
and to be offended are equall witnesses of imbecilitie: Then it is
folly to, feare God.  God is good by his owne nature, man by his
industry: which is more?  Divine wisdome and mans wisdome have no
other distinction but that the first is eternall. Now lastingnesse is
an accession unto wisdome.  Therefore are we fellowes. We have life
reason, and libertie, we esteeme goodnesse, charitie and justice;
these qualities are then in him.  In conclusion, the building and
destroying the conditions of divinity are forged by man according to
the relation to himselfe.  Oh what a patterne, and what a model!  Let
us raise and let us amplifie humane qualities as much as we please.
Puffe-up thy selfe poore man, yea swell and swell againe.

  ----- non si te ruperis, inquit./1

  Swell till you breake, you shall not be,

  Equall to that great one, quoth he.

Profecto non teum, quem cogitare non possunt, sed semetipsos pro illo
cogitantes, non illum, sed seipsos, non illi, sed sibi comparant. 'Of
a truth, they conceiting not God, whom they cannot conceive, but
themselves instead of God, doe not compare him, but themselves, not to
him but themseves.  In naturall things the effects doe but balfe
referre their causes.  What this?  It is above natures order, its
condition is too high, too far out of reach, and overswaying to
endure, that our conclusions should seize upon or fetter the same.  It
is not by our meanes we reach unto it, this traine is too low.  We are
no nerer heaven on the top of Sina mount than in the bottome of the
deepest sea: Consider of it that you may see with your Astrolabe.
They bring God even to the carnall acquaintance of women, to a
prefixed number of times, and to how many generations. Paulina, wife
unto Saturnius, a matron of great reputation in Rome, supposing to lye
with the God Serapis, by the maquerelage of the priests of that
Temple, found herself in the armes of a wanton lover of hers.  Varro,
the most subtill and wisest Latine Author, in his bookes of divinitie
writeth that Hercules his Sextaine, with one hand casting lots for
himselfe, and with the other for Hercules, gaged a supper and a wench
against him: if he won, at the charge of his offerings, but if he
lost, at his owne cost. He lost, and paid for a supper and a wench:
her name was Laurentina: who by the night saw that God in her armes,
saying moreover unto her that the next day the first man she met
withall should heavenly pay her her wages. It was fortuned to be one
Taruncius, a very rich young man, who tooke her home with him, and in
time left her absolute heire of all he had.  And she, when it came to
her turne, hoping to doe that God some acceptable service, left the
Romane people

----- 1 HOR.  Serm. 1. ii.  Sat. iii. 324.

heire generall or all her wealth.  And therefore she had divine
honours attributed unto her.  As if it were not sufficient for Plato
to descend originally from the Gods by a twofold line, and to have
Neptune for the common author of his race.  It was certainly beleeved
at Athens that Ariston, desiring to enjoy faire Perictyone, he could
not, and that in his dreame he was warned by God Apollo to leave her
untoucht and unpolluted untill such time as she were brought a bed.
And these were the father and mother of Plato.  How many such-like
cuckoldries are there in histories, procured by the Gods against seely
mortall men?  And husbands most injuriously blazoned in favor of their
children?  In Mahomets religion, by the easie beleefe of that people
are many Merlins found, that is to say, fatherless children:
spirituall children, conceived and borne divinely in the wombs of
virgins, and that in their language beare names importing as much.  We
must note that nothing is more deare and precious to any thing than
its owne being (the Lyon, the Eagle and the Dolphin esteeme nothing
above their kind), each thing referreth the qualities of all other
things unto her owne conditions, which we may either amplifie or
shorten; but that is all: for besides this principle, and out of this
reference, our imagination cannot go, and guesse further: and it is
unpossible it should exceed that, or goe beyond it. Whence arise these
ancient conclusions.  Of all formes, that of man is the fairest: then
God is of this forme.  No man can he happy without vertue, nor can
vertue be without reason; and no reason can lodge but in a humane
shape: God is then invested with a humane figure.  Ita est informatum
anticipatum mentibus nostris, ut homini, quum de Deo cogitet, forma
occurrat humana:/1 'The prejudice forestaled in our mindes is so
framed as the forme of man comes to mans minde when he is thinking of
God.' Therefore Xenophanes said presently, that if beasts frame any
Gods unto themselves, as likely it is they do, they surely frame them
like unto themselves,

----- 1 CIC.  Nat.  Deor. 1. i.

and glorifle themselves as we do.  For why may not a goose say thus?
All parts of the world behold me, the earth serveth me to tread upon,
the Sunne to give me light, the Starres to inspire me with influence;
this commoditie I have of the wind, and this benefit of the waters:
there is nothing that this worlds-vault doth so favourably look upon
as me selfe; I am the favorite of nature; is it not man that careth
for me, that keepeth me, lodgeth me, and serveth me?  For me it is he
soweth, reapeth, and grindeth: if he eat me, so doth man feed on his
fellow and so doe I on the wormes that consume and eat him.  As much
might a Crane say, yea and more boldly, by reason of her flights
libertie, and the possession of this goodly and high-bownding
region. Tam blanda conciliatrix, et tam sui est lena ipsa natura:/1
'So flattring a broker and bawd (as it were) is nature to it selfe.'
Now by the same consequence the destinies are for us, the world is for
us; it shineth, and thundreth for us: both the creator and the
creatures are for us: it is the marke and point whereat the
universitie of things aymeth.  Survay but the register which
Philosophy hath kept these two thousand years and more, of heavenly
affaires.  The Gods never acted, and never spake, but for man: She
ascribeth no other consultation, nor imputeth other vacation unto
them.  Loe how they are up in armes against us .  -----domitosque
Herculea manu

  Telluris iuvenes, unde periculum


  Fulgens contremuit domus

  Saturni veteris./2

  And young earth-gallants tamed by the hand

  Of Hercules, whereby the habitation

  Of old Saturnus did in perill stand,

  And, shyn'd it ne'er so bright, yet fear'd invasion,


See how they are partakers of our troubles, that so they may be even
with us, forsomuch as so many times we tire partakers of theirs.

-----1 CIC.  Nat.  Deor. 1. i. 2 HOR.  Car. 1. ii.  Od. xii. 6.

  Neptunus muros magnogue emota tridenti

  Fundamenta quatit, totamque a sedibus urbem

  Eruit: hic Iuno Scaeas saavissima portas Prima tenet./1

  Neptunas with his great three-forked mace

  Shaks the weake wall, and tottering foundation,

  And from the site the Cittie doth displace,

  Fierce Juno first holds ope the gates t'invasion.

The Caunians, for the jelousie of their owne Gods dominations upon
their devotion day arme themselves, and running up and downe,
brandishing and striking the ayre with their glaives, and in this
earnest manner they expell all foraine and banish all strange Gods
from out their territories.  Their powers are limited according to our
necessitie. Some heale horses, some cure men, some the plague, some
the scald, some the cough, some one kind of scab, and some another:
Adeo minimis etiam rebus prava religio inserit Deos: 'This corrupt
religion engageth and inserteth Gods even in the least matters:' some
make grapes to growe, and some garlike; some have the charge of
bawdrie and uncleanesse, and some of merchandise: to every kinde of
trades-man a God.  Some one hath his province and credit in the East,
and some in the West:

  -----hic illius arma

  Hic currus fuit./1


  His armor here

  His chariots there appeare.

  O sancte Apollo, qui umbilicum certum terrarum obtines./3

  Sacred Apollo, who enfoldest

  The earths set navell, and it holdest.


  Pallada Cecropiae, Minoia Creta Dianam,

  Vulcanum tellus Hipsi illa colit.

  Iunonem Sparte, Pelopeiadesque Mycena,

  Pinigerum Fauni Maenalis ora caput:

  Mars Latio venerandus./4


----- 1 VIRG.  AEn. 1. ii. 610. 2 Ib. 1. i. 20. 3 CIC.  Div. 1. ii. 4
OVID. Fast. 1. iii. 81.

  Besmeared with bloud and goare.

  Th'Athenians Pallas; Minos-Candy coast

  Diana, Lemnos Vulcan honors most;

  Mycene and Sparta, Juno thinke divine;

  The coast of Maenalus Fauns crown'd with pine;

  Latium doth Mars adore.

  Some hath but one borough or family in his possession: some lodgeth
  alone, and some in company, either voluntarily or necessarily.

  Iunctaque sunt magno templa nepotis avo./1

  To the great grand-sires shrine,

  The nephews temples doe combine.


Some there are so seely and popular (for their number amounteth to six
and thirty thousand) that five or six of them must be shufled up
together to produce an eare of corne, and thereof they take their
severall names.  Three to a doore, one to be the boards, one to be the
hinges, and the third to be the threshold.  Foure to a childe, as
protectors of his bandels, of his drinke, of his meat, and of his
sucking.  Some are certaine, others uncertaine, some doubtfull, and
some that come not yet into paradise.

  Quos, quoniam coeli nondum dignamur honore,

  Quas dedimus certe terras habitare sinamus./2

  Whom for as yet with heav'n we have not graced,

  Let them on earth by our good grant be placed.

There are some Philosophicall, some poeticall, and some civill, some
of a meane condition, betweene divine and humane nature, mediators and
spokes-men betweene us and God: worshipped in a kinde of second or
diminutive order of adoration: infinite in titles and offices: some
good, some bad, some old and crazed, and some mortall.  For Chrysippus
thought that in the last conflagration or burning of the world, all
the Gods should have an end, except Jupiter.  Man faineth a thousand
pleasant societies betweene God and him.  Nay, is he not his
countrieman?

----- 1 OVID.  Fast. 1. i. 294. 1 OVID.  Metam. 1. i. 194.

  -----Iovis incunabula Creten./1

  The Ile of famous Creet,


  For Jove a cradle meet.


Behold the excuse that Scaevola, chiefe Bishop, and Varro, a great
Divine, in their dayes, give us upon the consideration of this
subject.  It is necessary (say they) that man be altogether ignorant
of true things, and beleeve many false.  Quum veritatem qua liberetur,
inquirat; credatur ei expedite, quod fallitur: 'Since they seeke the
truth, whereby they may be free, let us beleeve it is expedient for
them to be received. Mans eye cannotr perceive things but by the
formes of his knowledge.  And we remember not the downfall of
miserable Phaeton, forsomuch as he undertooke to guide the reins of
his fathers steeds with a mortall hand.  Our minde doth still relapse
into the same depth, and by her owne temeritie doth dissipate and
bruise it selfe.  If you enquire of Philosophy what matter the Sun is
composed of, what will it answer? but of yron and stone, or other
stuffe for his use.  Demand of Zeno what Nature is?  A fire (saith
he), an Artist fit to engender and proceeding orderly.  Archimedes,
master of this Science, and who in truth and certaintie assumeth unto
himselfe a precedencie above all others, saith the Sunne is a God of
enflamed yron. Is not this a quaint imagination, produced by the
inevitable necessitie of Geometricall demonstrations?  Yet not so
unavoidable and beneficiall, but Socrates hath beene of opinion that
it sufficed to know so much of it as that a man might measure out the
land he either demized or tooke to rent: and that Polyaenus, who
therein had beene a famous and principall Doctor after he had tasted
the sweet fruits of the lazie, idle and delicious gardens of Epicurus,
did not contemne them as full of falsehood and apparent vanity.
Socrates, in Xenophon, upon this point of Anaxagoras, allowed and
esteemed of antiquitie, well seene and expert above all others in
heavenly and divine matters, saith, that he

----- 1 OVID.  Metam. 1. viii. 99.

weakened his braines much, as all men doe, who over nicely and
greedily will search out those knowledges which hang not for their
mowing nor pertaine unto them.  When he would needs have the sunn to
be a burning stone, he remembered not that stone doth not shine in the
fire; and which is more, that it consumes therein.  And when he made
the Sunne and fire to be all one, he forgot that fire doth not tan and
black those he looketh upon; that wee fixly looke upon the fire, and
that fire consumeth and killeth all plants and herbs.  According to
the advice of Socrates and mine, 'The wisest judging of heaven is not
to judge of it at all.  Plato in his Timeus, being to speake of
Daemons and spirits, saith it is an enterprise far exceeding my skill
and ability: we must beleeve what those ancient forefathers hath said
of them, who have said to have beene engendred by them.  It is against
reason not to give credit unto the children of the Gods, although
their sayings be neither grounded upon necessary nor likely reasons,
since they tell us that they speake of familiar and household matters.
Let us see whether we have a little more insight in the knowledge of
humane and naturall things.  Is it not a fond enterprise to those unto
which, by our owne confession, our learning cannot possibly attaine,
to devise and forge them another body, and of our owne invention to
give them a false forme? as is seene in the planetary motions, unto
which because our minde cannot reach, nor imagine their naturall
conduct, we lend them something of ours, that is to say, materiall,
grose, and corporall springs and wards:

  ----- temo aureus, aurea summae

  Curvatura rota, radiorum argenteus ordo./1


  The Axe-tree gold, the wheeles whole circle gold,

  The ranke of raies did all of silver hold.

You would say, we have the Coach-makers, Carpenters, and Painters, who
have gone up thither, and there have placed engines with diverse
motions, and ranged the

----- 1 OVID.  Metam. 1. ii. 107.

  wheelings, the windings and enterlacements of the celestial bodies
  diapred in colours, according to Plato, about the spindle of
  necessity.

  Mundus domus est maximna rerum,

  Quam quinque altitonae fragmine zonae

  Cingunt, per quam limbus pictus bis sex signis,

  Stellimicantibus, altus, in obliquo aethere, Lunae Bigas acceptat.

  The world, of things the greatest habitation,

  Which five high-thundring Zones by separation

  Engird, through which a scarfe depainted faire

  With twice six signes star-shining in the aire.

  Obliquely raisde, the waine

  O' th' Moone doth entertaine.

They are all dreames, and mad follies.  Why will not nature one day be
pleased to open her bosome to us, and make us perfectly see the meanes
and conduct of her motions, and enable our eyes to judge of them?  Oh,
good God, what abuses, and what distractions should we find in our
poor understanding and weake knowledge!  I am deceived if she hold one
thing directly in its point, and I shall part hence more ignorant of
all other things than mine ignorance.  Have I not seene this divine
saying in Plato, that Nature is nothing but an aenigmaticall poesie?
As a man might say, an overshadowed and darke picture, enter- shining
with an infinite varietie of false lights, to exercise our
conjectures: Latent ista omnia crassis occultata et circumfusa
tenebris: ut nulla acies humani ingenii tanta sit, quae penetrare
incaelum, terram intrare possit:/1 'All these things lye hid so veiled
and environed with misty darknesse, as no edge of man is so piersant
as it can passe into heaven or dive into the earth.' And truly
Philosophy is nothing else but a sophisticated poesie: whence have
these ancient authors all their authorities but from poets? And the
first were poets themselves, and in their art treated the same. Plato
is but a loose poet.  All high and more than humane sciences are
decked and enrobed with a poeticall style.  Even as

----- 1 CIC.  Acad.  Qu. 1. iv.

women, when their naturall teeth faile them, use some of yuorie and in
stead of a true beauties or lively colour, lay on some artificiall
hew; and as they make trunk sleeves of wire, and whale-bone bodies,
backes of lathes, and stiffe bombasted verdugals, and to the open-view
'of all men paint and embellish themselves with counterfeit and
borrowed beauties; so doth learning (and our law hath, as some say,
certaine lawfull fictions, on which it groundeth the truth of justice)
which in liew of currant payment and presupposition, delivereth us
those things, which she her selfe teacheth us to be meere inventions:
for these Epicycles Excentriques, and Concentriques, which Astrology
useth to direct the state and motions of her starres, she giveth them
unto us, as the best she could ever invent, to fit and sute unto this
subject: as in all things else, Philosophy presenteth unto us, not
that which is or she beleeveth, but what she inventeth as having most
apparence, likelihood, or comelinesse.  Plato upon the discourse of
our bodies estate and of that of beasts: that what we have said is
true we would be assured of it had we but the confirmation of some
oracle to confirme it.  This only we warrant, that it is the likeliest
we could say.  It is not to heaven alone that she sendeth her
cordages, her engines, and her wheeles.  Let us but somewhat consider
what she saith of our selves and of our contexture.  There is no more
retrogradation, trepidation, augmentation, recoyling, and violence in
the starres and celestiall bodies than they have fained and devised in
this, poor seeley little body of man.  Verily they have thence had
reason to name it Microcosmos, or little world, so many severall parts
and visages have they imploied to fashion and frame the same.  To
accommodate the motions which they see in man, the divers functions
and faculties that We feel in our selves.  Into how many severall
parts have they divided our soule?  Into how many seats have they
placed her?  Into how many orders, stages, and stations have they
divided this wretched man, beside the naturall and perceptible? and to
how many distinct offices and vocations?  They make a publike
imaginarie thing of it.  It is a subject which they hold and handle:
they have all power granted them to rip him, to sever him, to range
him, to join and reunite him together againe, and to stuffe him every
one according to his fantasia; and yet they neither have nor possess
him.  They cannot so order or rule him, not in truth onely, but in
imagination, but still some cadence or sound is discovered which
escapeth their architecture, bad as it is, and botched together with a
thousand false patches and fantasticall peeces.  And they have no
reason to be excused: for to painters when they pourtray the heaven,
the earth, the seas, the hills, the scattered Ilands, we pardon them
if they but represent us with some slight apparence of them; and as of
things unknowne we are contented with such fained shadows.  But when
they draw us, or any other subject that is familiarly knowne unto us,
to the life, then seeke we to draw from them a perfect and exact
representation of their or our true lineaments or colours, and scorne
if they misse never so little.  I commend the Milesian wench, who
seeing Thales the Philosopher continually amusing himself in the
contemplation of heavens wide-bounding vault, and ever holding his
eyes aloft, laid something in his way to make him stumble, thereby to
warne and put him in minde that he should not amuse his thoughts about
matters above the clouds before he had provided for and well
considered those at his feet. {Laputa+} Verily she advised him well,
and it better became him rather to looke to himselfe than to gaze on
heaven; for, as Democritus by the mouth of Cicero saith,

  Quod este ante pedes, nemo spectat; coli scrutantur plagas/1

  No man lookes what before his feet doth lie,

  They seeke and search the climates of the skie.

But our condition beareth that the knowledge of what we touch with our
hands and have amongst us, is as far from us and above the clouds as
that of the stars.  As saith Socrates in Plato, that one may justly
say to

----- 1 CIC.  Div. 1. ii.

him who medleth with Philosophy, as the woman said to Thales, which
is, he seeth nothing of that which is before him.  For every
Philosopher is ignorant of what his neighbour doth; yea, he knowes not
what himselfe doth, and wots not what both are, whether beasts or men.
These people who thinke Sebondes reasons to be weake and lame, who
know nothing themselves, and yet will take upon them to governe the
world and know all:

  Quae mare compescant causae, quid temperet annum,

  Stellae sponte sua, jussaeve vagentur et errent: Quid premat
  obscurae

  Lunae, quid proferat orbem,

  Quid velit et possit rerum concordia discors./1

  What cause doth calm the Sea, what cleares the yeare,

  Whether Stars force't, or of selfe-will appeares;

  What makes the Moones darke Orbe to wax or wane,

  What friendly fewd of things both will and can.

Did they never sound amid their books the difficulties that present
themselves to them to know their owne being?  We see very well that
our finger stirreth and our foot moveth, that some parts of our body
move of themselves without our leave, and other some that stirr but at
our pleasure: and we see that certaine apprehensions engender a
blushing-red colour, others a palenesse; that some imagination doth
only worke in the milt, another in the braine; some one enduceth us to
laugh, another causeth us to weep; some astonisheth and stupifieth all
our senses, and staieth the motion of all our limbs; at some object
the stomake riseth, and at some other the lower parts.  But how a
spirituall impression causeth or worketh such a dent or flaw in a
massie and solid body or subject, and the nature of the conjoyning and
compacting of these admirable springs and wards, man yet never knew:
Omnia incerta ratione, et in naturae majestate abdita:/2 'All
uncertaine in reason, and hid in the majesty of nature.' Saith Plinie
and Saint Augustine: Modus, quo corporibus adhaerent spiritus, omnino
mirus est nec comprehendi ab homine potent, et hoc

----- 1 HOR. 1. i.  Epist. xii. 16. 2 PLIN.

ipso homo est:/1 'The meane is clearely wonderfull whereby spirits
cleave to our bodies, nor can it be comprehended by man, and that is
very man.' Yet is there no doubt made of him: for mens opinions are
received after ancient beliefs by authority and upon credit; as if it
were a religion and a law.  What is commonly held of it, is received
as a gibrish or fustian tongue.  This trueth, with all her framing of
arguments and proporcioning of proofes, is received as a firme and
solid body which is no more shaken, which is no more judged.  On the
other side, every one the best he can patcheth up and comforteth this
received beliefe with all the meanes his reason can afford him, which
is an instrument very supple, pliable, and yeelding to all
shapes. 'Thus is the world filled with toyes, and overwhelmed in lies
and leasings.  The reason that men doubt not much of things is that
common impressions are never throughly tride and sifted, their ground
is not sounded, nor where the fault and weaknes lieth.  Men only
debate and question of the branch, not of the tree: they aske not
whether a thing be true, but whether it was understood or meant thus
and thus.  They enquire not whether Galen hath spoken any thing of
worth, but whether thus, or so, or otherwise.  Truly there was some
reason this bridle or restraint of our judgements liberty, and this
tyranny over our beliefs should extend it selfe even to schooles and
arts.  The God of scholasticall learning is Aristotle: It is religion
to debate of his ordinances, as those of Lycurgus in Sparta.  His
doctrine is to us as a canon law, which peradventure is as false as
another.  I know not why I should or might not, as soone and as easie
accept either Platoes Ideas, or Epicurus his atomes and indivisible
things, or the fulnesse and emptines of Leucippus and Democritus, or
the water of Thales, or Anaximanders infinite of nature, or the aire
of Diogenes, or the numbers or proportion of Pythagoras, or the
infinite of Parmenides, or the single-one of Musaeus, or the water and
fire of Apollodorus, or the similarie and ----- 1 AUG.  De Spir. et
Anim.  De Civ.  Dei, xxi. 10.

resembling parts of Anaxagoras, or the discord and concord of
Empedocles, or the fire of Heraclitus, or an other opinion (of this
infinit confusion of opinions an sentences which this goodly humane
reason, by her certainty and clear-sighted vigilancie brings forth in
whatsoever it medleth withal) as I should of Aristotle's conceit,
touching this subject of the principles of naturall things, which he
frameth of three parts; that is to say, matter, forme, and privation.
And what greater vanitie can there be than to make inanitie it selfe
the cause of the production of thingS?  Privation is a negative: with
what humour could he make it the cause and beginning of things that
are?  Yet durst no man move that but for an exercise of logike:
wherein nothing is disputed to put it in doubt, but to defend the
author of fhe schoole from strange objections.  His authoritie is the
marke beyond which it is not lawfull to enquire.  It is easie to frame
what one list upon allowed foundations: for, according to the law and
ordinance of this positive beginning, the other parts of the frame are
easily directed without crack or danger.  By which way we finde our
reason well grounded, and we discourse without rub or let in the way:
For our masters preoccupate and gains afore-hand as much place in our
beleefe as they need to conclude afterward what they please, as
geometricians doe by their graunted questions: the consent and
approbation which we lend them, giving them wherewith to draw us,
either on the right or left hand, and at their pleasure to winde and
turne us.  Whosoever is beleeved in his presuppositions, he is our
master, and our God.  He will lay the plot of his foundations so ample
and easie, that, if he list, he will carrie us up, even unto the
clouds.  In this practice or negotiation of learning, we have taken
the saying of Pythagoras for currant payment; which is, that every
expert man ought to be bielieved in his owne trade.  The logitian
referreth himselfe to the grammarian for the Signification of words..
The rhetoritian borroweth the places of arguments from the logitian;
the poet his measures from the musician; the geo- metrician his
proportions from the arithmetician; the metaphisikes take the
conjectures of the physikes for a ground, for every art hath her
presupposed principles by which mans judgment is bridled on all parts.
If you come to the shocke or front of this barre, in which consists
the principall error, they immediately pronounce this sentence: that
there is no disputing against such as deny principles.  There can be
no principles in men, except divinitie hath revealed them unto them:
all the rest, both beginning, middle, and end, is but a dreame and a
vapor.  Those that argue by presupposition, we must presuppose against
them the very same axiome which is disputed of.  For, each humane
presupposition, and every invention, unlesse reason make a difference
of it, hath as much authoritie as another.  So must they all be
equally balanced, and first the generall and those that tyrannize us.
A perswasion of certaintie is a manifest testimonie of foolishnesse,
and of extreme uncertaintie.  And no people are lesse philosophers and
more foolish than Platoe's Philodoxes, or lovers of their owne
opinions.  We must know whether fire be hot, whether snow be white,
whether, in our knowledge, there be anything hard or soft.  And
touching the answers, whereof they tell old tales, as to him who made
a doubt of heat, to whom one replied, that to trie he should caste
himselfe into the fire; to him that denied the yce to be cold, that he
should put some in his bosome; they are most unworthy the profession
of a philosophers.  If they had left us in our owne naturall estate,
admitting of strange apparences as they present themselves unto us by
our senses, and had suffered us to follow our naturall appetites,
directed by the condition of our birth, they should then have reason
to speak so.  But from them it is that we have learnt to become judges
of the world; it is from them we hold this conceit, that mans reason
is the generall controuler of all that is, both without and within
heavens-vault, which imbraceth all and can doe all, by meanes whereof
all things are knowne and discerned.  This answer were good among the
canibals, who without any of Aristotles precepts, or so much as
knowing the name of naturall philosophy, enjoy most happily a long, a
quiet, and a peaceable life. {noble_savage+} This answer might haply
availe more, and be of more force, than all those they can borrow from
their reason and invention. All living creatures, yea, beasts and all,
where the commandment of the naturall law is yet pure and simple,
might with us be capable of this answer, but they have renounced it.
They shall not need to tell me it is true, for you both heare and see
it is so.  They must tell me if what I thinke I feel, I feel the same
in effect; and if I feel it, then let them tell me wherefore I feel
it, and how and what.  Let them tell me the name, the beginninly, the
tennons, and the abuttings of heat and of cold, with the qualities of
him that is agent, or of the patient: or let them quit me their
profession, which is neither to admit nor approve anything by way of
reason.  It is their touchstone to try all kinds of essayes.  But
surely it is a touchstone full of falsehood, errors, imperefection and
weakenesse: which way can we better make triall of it than by it
selfe?  If she may not be credited speaking of her selfe, I hardly can
she be fit to judge of strange matters.  If she know anything, it can
be but her being and domicile. She is in the soule, and either a part
or effect of the same.  For the true and essential reason (whose name
we steal by false signes) lodgeth in Gods bosome.  There is her home,
and there is her retreat, thence she takes her flight when Gods
pleasure is that we shall see some glimps of it: even as Pallas issued
out of her fathers bead, to communicate and empart her selfe unto the
world.  Now let us see what mans reason hath taught us of her selfe
and of the soule: not of the soule in generall, whereof well nigh all
philosophy maketh both the celestiall and first bodies partakers; not
of that which Thales attributed even unto things that are reputed
without soule or life, drawne thereunto by the consideration of the
Adamant stone: but of that which appertaineth to us, and which we
should know best.

  Iqnoratur enim qu&, sit natura animai,

  Nata sit, an contra nascentibus insinuetur,

  Et simul intereat nobiscum morte dirempta,

  An tenebras orci visat, vastasque lacunas,

  An pecudes alias divinitus insinuet se./1

  What the soules nature is, we doe not know:

  If it be bred, or put in those are bred,

  Whether by death divorst with us it goe,

  Or see the darke vast lakes of hell below,

  Or into other creatures turne the head.

To Crates and Dicaearchus it seemed that there was none at all; but
that the body stirred thus with and by a naturall motion: to Plato,
that it was a substance moving of it selfe; to Thales, a Nature
without rest; to Asclepiades, an exercitation of the senses; to
Hesiodus and Anaximander, a thing composed of earth and water; to
Parmenides; of earth and fire; to Empedocles, of blood:

  Sanguineam vomit ille animant./2

  His soule of purple-bloud he vomits out.

  To Possidoinus, Cleanthes, and Galen, a heat, or hot complexion:

  Igneus est ollis vigor, et coelestis origo:/3

  A firy vigor and celestiall spring,

  In their originall they strangely bring.

To Hyppocrates, a spirit dispersed thorow the body; to Varro, an air
received in at the mouth, heated in the lungs, tempered in the heart,
and dispersed thorow all parts of the body; to Zeno, the quintessence
of the foure elements; to Heraclides Ponticus, the light; to
Xenocrates and to the Egyptians, a moving number; to the Chaldeans, a
vertue without any determinate forme.

  -----Habitum quemdam vitalem corporis esse,

  Harmoniam Gaeci quam dicunt.4


  There of the body is a vitall frame,

  The which the Greeks a harmony doe name.


----- 1 LUCR. 1. i. 113. 2 VIRG.  AEn. 1. ix. 849. 3 Ib. vi. 730. 4
LUCR. 1. iii. 100.

And not forgetting Aristotle, that which naturally causeth the body to
move, who calleth it Entelechy, or perfection moving of itselfe (as
cold an invention as any other), for he neither speaketh of the
essence, nor of the beginning nor of the soules nature, but onely
noteth the effects of it: Lactantius, Seneca, and the better part
amongst the Dogmatists, have confessed they never understood what it
was: and after all this rable of opinions. Harum sententiarum quae
vera sit, Deus aliquis viderit:/1 'Which of these opinions is true,
let some God looke unto it,' saith Cicero.  I know by myselfe, quoth
Saint Bernard, how God is incomprehensible, since I am not able to
comprehend the parts of mine owne being: Heraclitus, who held that
every place was full of Soules and Demons, maintained neverthelesse
that a man could never goe so far towards the knowledge of the soule
as that he could come unto it; so deep and mysterious was her essence.
There is no lesse dissention nor disputing about the place where she
should be seated.  Hypocrates and Herophilus place it in the ventricle
of the brain: Democritus and Aristotle, through all the body:

  Ut bona scope valetudo cum dicitur esse

  Corporis, et non est tanten haec pars ulla valentis./2

  As health is of the body said to be,

  Yet is no part of him in health we see.

  Epicurus in the stomacke.

  Hic exultat enim pavor ac metus, haec loca circum

  Laetitiae mulcent./3

  For in these places feare doth domineere,

  And neere these places joy keepes merry cheere.

The Stoickes, within and about the heart; Erasistratus, joyning the
membrane of the epicranium: Empedocles, in the bloud: as also Moses,
which was the cause he forbade the eating of beasts bloud, unto which
their soule is commixed: Galen thought that every part of the body had
his soule: Strato hath placed it betweene

----- 1 CIC.  Tusc.  Qu. 1. i. 2 2 LUCR. 1. iii. 103. 3 Ib. 142.

the two upper eyelids: Qua facie quidem sit animus aut ubi habitet,
nec quaerendum quidem est:/1 'We must not so much as enquire what face
the minde beares, or where it dwells,' saith Cicero.  I am well
pleased to let this man use his owne words: for why should I alter the
speech of eloquence it selfe? since there is small gaine in stealing
matter from his inventions: They are both little used, not very
forcible, and little unknowne.  But the reason why Chrysippus and
those of his sect will prove the soule to be about the heart,
{PlainDealer+} is not to be forgotten. It is (saith he) because when
we will affirme or swear anything, we lay our hand upon the stomacke;
and when we will pronounce %@&, which signifieth my selfe, we put
downe our chin towards the stomacke.  This passage ought not to be
past-over without noting the vanity of so great a personage: for,
besides that his considerations are of themselves very slight, the
latter proveth but to the Graecians that they have their soule in that
place.  No humane judgement is so vigilant or Argoesied, but sometimes
shall fall asleep or slumber.  What shall we feare to say?  Bebold the
Stoickes+, fathers of humane wisdome, who devise that the soule of
man, overwhelmed with any ruine, laboureth and panteth a long time to
get out, unable to free herselfe from that charge, even as a mouse
taken in a trap.  Some are of opinion that the world was made to give
a body, in lieu of punishment, unto the spirits, which through their
fault were fallen from the puritie wherein they were created: the
first creation having been incorporeall. And that according as they
have more or lesse removed themselves their spirituality, so are they
more or lesse merily and giovally. or rudely and saturnally
incorporated: whence proceedeth the infinite variety of so much matter
created.  But the spirit, who for his chastizement was invested wite
bodie of the Sunne, must of necessitie have a very rare and particular
measure of alteration.  The extremities of our curious search turne to
a glimmering and all to a dazeling.  As Plutarke saith

----- 1 CIC.  Tusc.  Qu. 1. i.

of the off-spring of histories, that after the manner of cards or
maps, the utmost limits of known countries are set downe to be full of
thicke marrish grounds, shady forrests, desart and uncouth places.
See here wherefore the grosest and most childish dotings are more
commonly found in these which treat of highest and fnrthest matters;
even confounding and overwhelming themselves in their own curiositie
and presumption.  The end and beginning of learning are equally
accompted foolish.  Marke but how Plato talketh and raiseth his flight
aloft in his Poeticall clouds, or cloudy Poesies. Behold and read in
him the gibbrish of the Gods. nbsp; But what dreamed or doted he on
when he defined man to be a creature with two feet, and without
feathers; giving them that were disposed to mocke at him a pleasant
and scopefull occasion to doe it?  For, having plucked-off the
feathers of a live capon, they named him the man of Plato.  And by
what simplicitie did the Epicureans first imagine that the Atomes or
Motes, which they termed to be bodies, having some weight and a
naturall moving downeward, had framed the world; untill such time as
they were advised by their adversaries that by this description it was
not possible they should joyne and take hold one of another; their
fall being so downe-right and perpendicular, and every way engendring
parallel lines?  And therefore was it necessarie they should afterward
adde a causall moving sideling unto them: And moreover to give their
Atomes crooked and forked tailes, that so they might take hold of any
thing and claspe themselves.  And even then those that pursue them
with this other consideration, doe they not much trouble them?  If
Atomes have by chance formed so many sorts of figures, why did they
never meet together to frame a house or make a shooe?  Why should we
not likewise beleeve that an infinit number of Greek letters,
confusedly scattered in some open place, might one day meet and joyne
together to the contexture of the Iliads? That which is capable of
reason (saith Zeno) is better than that which is not.  There is
nothing better than the world: then the world is capable of reason.
By the same arguing Cotta maketh the world a Mathematician, and by
this other arguing of Zeno, he makes him a Musitian and an Organist.
The whole is more than the part: we are capable of wisdom, and we are
part of the world: then the world is wise.  There are infinit like
examples seene, not only of false, but foolish arguments, which cannot
hold, and which accuse their authors not so much of ignorance as of
folly, in the reproaches that Philosophers charge one another with,
about the disagreeings in their opinions and sects.  He that should
fardle-up a bundle or huddle of the fooleries of mans wisdome, might
recount wonders.  I willingly assemble some (as a shew or patterns) by
some means or byase, no lesse profitable than the most moderate
instructions. Let us by that judge what we are to esteeme of man, of
his sense, and of his reason; since in these great men, and who have
raised mans sufficiencie so high, there are found so grose errors and
so apparant defects.  As for me, I would rather beleeve that they have
thus casually treated learning even as a sporting childs baby, and
have sported themselves with reason, as of a vaine and frivolous
instrument, setting forth all sorts of inventions, devices, and
fantasies, sometimes more outstretched, and sometimes more loose.  The
same Plato, who defineth man like unto a Capon, saith elsewhere, after
Socrates, that in good sooth he knoweth not what man is; and that of
all parts of the world there is none so hard to be knowne.  By this
varietie of conceits and instabilitie of opinions, they, as it were,
leade us closely by the hand to this resolution of their irresolution.
They make a profession not alwayes to present their advice manifest
and unmasked: they have oft concealed the same under the fabulous
shadows of Poesie, and sometimes under other vizards.  For our
imperfection admitteth this also, that raw meats are not alwayes good
for our stomacks: but they must be dried, altred, and corrupted, and
so doe they who sometimes shadow their simple opinions and judgements;
and that they may the better sute themselves unto common use, they
many times falsifie them.  They will not make open profession of
ignorance, and of the imbecilitie of mans reason, because they will
not make children afraid, but they manifestly declare the same unto us
under the shew of a troubled Science and unconstant learning.  I
perswaded somebody in Italy, who laboured very much to speak Italian,
that always provided he desired but to be understood, and not to seek
to excell others therein, he should onely imploy and use such words as
came first to his month, whether they were Latine, French, Spanish, or
Gascoine, and that adding the Italian terminations unto them, he
should never misse to fall upon some idiome of the countrie, either
Tuscan, Roman, Venetian, Piemontoise, or Neapolitan; and amongst so
many severall formes of speech to take hold of one.  The very same I
say of Philosophy.  She hath so many faces and so much varietie, and
hath said so much, that all our dreames and devices are found in her.
The fantasie of man can conceive or imagine nothing, be it good or
evill, that is not to be found in her: Nihil tam absurde dici potest,
quod non dicatur ab aliquo Philosophorum/1 'Nothing may be spoken so
absurdly, but that it is spoken by some of the Philosophers.  And
therefore doe I suffer my humours or caprices more freely to passe in
publike; forasmuch as though they are borne with, and of me, and
without any patterne, well I wot they will be found to have relation
to some ancient humour, and some shall be found that will both know
and tell whence and of whom I have borrowed them.  My customes are
naturall; when I contrived them, I called not for the helpe of any
discipline: and weake and faint as they were, when I have had a desire
to expresse them, and to make them appear to the world a little more
comely and decent, I have somewhat endevoured to aid them with
discourse, and assist them with examples, I have wondred at my selfe
that by meere chance I have met with them, agreeing and sutable to so
many ancient examples and Philo-

----- 1 CIC.  Div. 1. ii.

sophicall discourses.  What regiment my life was of, I never knew nor
learned but after it was much worne, and spent.  A new figure: an
unpremeditated philosopher and a casuall.  But to returne unto our
soule, where Plato hath seated reason in the braine; anger in the
heart; lust in the liver; it is very likely that it was rather an
interpretation of the soules motions than any division or separation
he meant to make of it, as of a body into many members.  And the
likeliest of their opinion is that it is alwayes a soule, which by her
rationall faculty remembreth her selfe, comprehendeth, judgeth,
desireth, and exerciseth all her other functions by divers instruments
of the body, as the pilote ruleth and directeth his ship according to
the experience he hath of it; now stretching, haling, or loosing a
cable, sometimes hoysing the mainyard, removing an oare, or stirring
the rudder, causing severall effects with one only power; and that she
abideth in the braine, appeareth by this, that the hurts and accidents
which touch that part doe presently offend the faculties of the soule,
whence she may without inconvenience descend and glide through other
parts of the body:

  ----- medium non deserit unquam

  Coeli Phoebus iter: radus tamen omnia lustrat:/1

  Never the Sunne forsakes heav'ns middle wayes,

  Yet with his rayesa he lights all, all survayes:

  As the sunne spreadeth his light, and infuseth his power from
  heaven, and therewith filleth the whole world.

  Caetera pars animae per totum dissita corpus

  Paret, et ad numen mentis nomenque movetur./2

  Th' other part of the soule through all the body sent

  Obeyes, and moved is, by the mindes government.

Some have said that there was a generall soule, like unto a great
body, from which all particular, soules were extracted, and returned
thither; alwayes reconjoyning and entermingling themselves unto that
universall matter:

----- 1 CLAUD. vi.  Hons.  Cons.  Pan. 411, 2 LUCR. 1. iii. 144.

  -----Deum namque ire per omnes

  Terrasque tractusque maris coelumque profundum:


  Hinc pecudes, armenta, viros, genus omne ferarum,

  Quemque sibi tenues nascentem arcessere vitas,

  Scilicet huc reddi deinde, ac resoluta referri

  Omnia: nec morti esse locum./1

  For God through all the earth to passe is found,

  Through all Sea currents, through the heav'n profound.

  Here hence men, heards, and all wilde beasts that are,

  Short life in birth each to themselves doe share.

  All things resolved to this point restor'd

  Returne, nor any place to death affoord.

Others, that they did but reconjoyne and fasten themselves to it
againe: others, that they were produced by the divine substance:
others, by the angels, of fire and aire: some from the beginning of
the world, and some even at the time of need: others make them to
descend from the round of the moone, and that they returne to it
againe.  The common sort of antiquities that they are begotten from
father to sonne, after the same manner and production that all other
naturall things are; arguing so by the resemblances which are betweene
fathers and children.

  Insullata patris virtus tibi,/2

  Thy vertues be

  Instilled into thee.

  Fortes creantur fortibus et bonis,/3

  Of valiant Sires and good,

  There comes a valiant brood.


And that from fathers we see descend unto children, not only the marks
of their bodies, but also a resemblance of humours, of complexions,
and inclinations of the soule.

  Denique cur acrum violentia triste Leonum

  Seminum sequitur, dolus Vulpibus, et fuga Cervis

  A patribus datur, et patrius pavor incitat Artus,

  Si non certa suo quia semine seminioque

  Vis animi pariter crescit cum corpore toto?/4


----- 1 VIRG.  Georg. 1. iv. 222. 2 HOR.  Car. 1. iv.  Od. iv. 29 3
LUCR. 1. iii. 766. 4 Ib. 771.


  Why followes violence the savage Lyons race?

  Why craft the Foxes?  Why, to Deere to flye apace?

  By parents is it given, when parents feare incites,

  Unlesse because a certaine force of inward spirits

  With all the body growes, As seed and seed-spring goes?

That divine justice is grounded thereupon, punishing the fathers
offences upon the children; forsomuch as the contagion of the fathers
vices is in some sort printed in childrens soules, and that the
misgovernment of their will toucheth them.{Gloucester+} Moreover, that
if the soules came from any other place, then by a naturall
consequence, and that out of the body they should have beene some
other thing, they should have some remembrance of their first being:
considering the naturall faculties which are proper unto him, to
discourse, to reason, and to remember.

  ----- Si in corpus nascentibits insinuatur,

  Cur super anteactam aetatem meminisse nequimus,


  Nec vestigia gesta-um rerum ulla tenemus. /1

  If our soule at our birth be in our body cast,

  Why can we not remember ages over-past,

  Nor any markes retaine of things done first or last?


For, to make our soules condition to be of that worth we would, they
must all be presupposed wise, even when they are in their naturall
simplicitie and genuine puritie.  So should they have beene such,
being freed from the corporall prison, as well before they entred the
same, as we hope they shall be when they shall be out of it.  And it
were necessarie they should (being yet in the body) remember the said
knowledge (as Plato said) that what we learnt was but a new remembring
of that which we had knowne before: a thing that any man may by
experience maintaine to be false and erroneous.  First, because we doe
not precisely remember what we are tanght, and that if memorie did
meerely execute her functions she would at least suggest us with
something besides our learning.  Secondly, what she

-----1 LUCR. 1. iii. 692.

knew being in her puritie, was a true understanding, knowing things as
they are by her divine intelligence: whereas here, if she be
instructed, she is made to receive lies and apprehend vice, wherein
she cannot imploy her memorie; this image and conception having never
had place in her.  To say that the corporall prison doth so suppresse
her naturall faculties, that they are altogether extinct in her:
first, is cleane contrarie to this other beleefe, to knowledge her
forces so great, and the operations which men in this transitorie life
feel of it, so wonderfull, as to have thereby concluded this
divinitie, and fore-past eternitie, and the immortalitie to come:

  Nam si tantopere est animi mutata potestas,

  Omnis ut actarum excident retinentia rerum,

  Non ut opinor ea ab letho jam longior errat./1

  If of our minde the Power he so much altered,

  As of things done all hold, all memorie is fled,

  Then (as I guesse) it is not far from being dead.

Moreover, it is here with us, and no where else, that the soules
powers and effects are to be considered; all the rest of her
perfections are vaine and unprofitable unto her: it is by her present
condition that all her immortalitie must be rewarded and paid, and she
is only accomptable for the life of man: it were injustice to have
abridged her of her meanes and faculties, and to have disarmed her
against the time of her captivitie and prison, for her weaknesse and
sicknesse, of the time and season where she had hectic forced and
compelled to draw the judgement and condemnation of infinite and
endlesse continuance, and to relye upon the consideration of so short
a time, which is peradventure of one or two houres, or, if the worst
happen, of an age (which have no more proportion with infinitie than a
moment definitively to appoint and establish of all her being by that
instant of space.  It were an impious disproportion to wrest an
eternall reward in consequence of so short a life.  Plato, to save
himselfe from this

----- 1 LUCR. 1. iii. 696.

inconvenience, would have future payments limited to a hundred yeares
continuance, relatively unto a humane continuance: and many of ours
have given them temporall limits.  By this they judged that her
generation followed the common condition of humane things: as also her
life, by the opinion of Epicurus and Democritus, which hath most been
received; following these goodly apparences.  That her birth was seene
when the body was capable of her; her vertue and strength was
perceived as the corporall encreased; in her infancie might her
weaknesse he discerned, and in time her vigor and ripenesse, then her
decay and age, and in the end her decrepitude.

  ----- gigni pariter cum corpore, et una

  Crescere sentimus, pariterque senescere mentem./1


  The minde is with the body bred, we doe behold,

  It jointly growes with it, with it it waxeth old.

They perceived her to be capable of diverse passions, and agitated by
many languishing and painfull motions, wherethrough she fell into
wearinesse and griefe, capable of alteration and change of joy,
stupefaction, and languishment, subject to her infirmities, diseases,
and offences, even as the stomacke or the foot;

  -----mentem sanari, corpus ut aegrum

  Cernimus, et flecti medicine posse videmus:/2


  We see as bodies sicke are cur'd, so is the minde,

  We see, how Physicke can it each way turne and winde,

dazled and troubled by the force of wine; removed from her seat by the
vapors of a burning feaver; drowzie and sleepy by the application of
some medicaments, and rouzed up againe by the vertue of some others.

  -----corpoream naturam animi esse necesse est,

  Corporeis quoniam telis ictuque laborat./3


  The nature of the minde must needs corporeall bee,

  For with corporeall darts and strokes it's griev'd we see.


----- 1 LUCR. 1. iii. 450.  Ib. 517.  Ib. 176.

She was seene to dismay and confound all her faculties by the only
biting of a sicke dog, and to containe no great constancie of
discourse, no sufficiencie, no vertue, no philosophicall resolution,
no contention of her forces that might exempt her from the subjection
of these accidents: the spittle or slavering of a mastive dog shed
upon Socrates his hands, to trouble all his wisdome, to distemper his
great and regular imagination, and so to vanquish and annull them that
no signe or shew of his former knowledge was left in him:

  ----- vis animai

  Conturbatur, et divisa seorsum


  Disjectatur eodem illo distracta veneno./1 The soules force is
  disturbed, separated, Distraught by that same poison, alienated.

And the said venome to finde no more resistance in his soule than in
that of a childe of foure yeares old, a venome able to make all
Philosophy (were she incarnate) become furious and mad: so that Cato,
who scorned both death and fortune, could not abide the sight of a
looking glasse or of water; overcome with horrour, and quelled with
amazement, if by the contagion of a mad dog he had fallen into that
sicknesse which physitians call hydrophobia, or feare of waters.

  ----- vis morbi distracta per artus

  Turbat aqens animam, spumantes aequore salso


  Ventorum ut validis fervescunt viribus undae./2

  The force of the disease disperst through joints offends,

  Driving the soule, as in salt Seas the wave ascends,

  Foming by furious force which the wind raging lends.

Now, concerning this point.  Philosophy hath indeed armed man for the
endurng' of all other accidents, whether with patience, or if it be
overcostly to be found, with an infallible defeat in conveying her
selfe altogether from the sense: but they are meanes which

-----1 LUCR. 1. iii. 501. 2 Ib. 495.

serve a soule that is her owne, and in her proper force capable of
discourse and deliberation: not serving to this inconvenience
wherewith a Philosopher, a soule becommeth the soule of a foole,
troubled, vanquished and lost. Which divers occasions may produce, as
in an over-violent agitation, which by some vehement passion the soule
may beget in her selfe: or a hurt in some part of the body, or an
exhalation from the stomacke, casting as into some astonishment,
dazling, or giddinesse of the head:

  -----morbis in corporis avius errat

  Saepe animus, dementit enim, delirague fatur,


  Interdumque gravi -Lethargo fertur in altum

  AEternumque soporem, oculis nutuque cadenti./1

  The mind in bodies sicknesse often wandring strayes;

  For it enraged raves, and idle talk outbrayes;

  Brought by sharpe Lethargy sometime to more than deepe,

  While eyes and eye-lids fall into eternall sleepe.

Philosophers have, in mine opinion, but slightly harpt upon this
string, no more than other of like consequence.  They have ever this
dilemma in their mouth to comfort our mortall condition: 'The soule is
either mortall or immortall: if mortall, she shall be without paine:
if immortall, she shall mend.  They never touch the other branch: what
if she empaire and be worse? and leave the menaces of future paines to
Poets.  But thereby they deal themselves a good game.  These are two
omissions which in their discourses doe often offer themselves unto
me.  I come to the first againe: the soule loseth the use of that
Stoicall chiefe felicitie, so constant and so firme.  Our goodly
wisdome must necessarily in this place yeelde her selfe and quit her
weapons.  As for other matters, they also considered by the vanitie of
mans reason, that the admixture and societie of two so different parts
as is the mortall and the immortall is unimaginable:

----- 1 LUCR. 1. iii. 467.

  Quippe etenim mortale aeterno jungere, et una

  Consentire putare, et fungi mutua posse,

  Desipere est.  Quid enim diversius esse putandum est,

  Aut magis inter se disjuncture discrepitansque,

  Quam mortale quod est, immortali atque perenni

  Iunctum in concilio saevas tolerare procellas?/1

  For what immortall is, mortall to joyne unto,

  And thinke they caN agree, and mutual duties doe,

  Is to be foolish: for what thinke we stranger is,

  More disagreenble or more disjoyn'd than this,

  That mortall with immortall endlesse joyn'd in union,

  Can most outrageous stormes endure in their communion?

  Moreover they felt their soule to be engaged in death as well as the
  body.

  ----- simul aevo fessa fatiscit,/2

  It faints in one,

  Wearied as age is gone.


Which thing (according to Zeno) the image of sleep doth manifestly
show unto us.  For he esteemeth that it is a fainting and declination
of the soule as well as of the body: Contrahi animum, et quasi labi
putat atque decidere:/3 'He thinks the minde is contracted, and doth
as it were slide and fall downe.'  And that (which is perceived in
some) its force and vigor maintaineth it selfe even in the end of
life, they referred and imputed the same to the diversitie of
diseases, as men are seene in that extremitie to maintaine some one
sense and some another, some their hearing and some their smelling,
without any alteration; and there is no weaknesse or decay seene so
universall but some entire and vigorous parts will remaine.

  Non alio pacto quam si pes cum dolet aegri,

  In nullo caput interea sit forte dolore./4

  No otherwise than if, when sick-mans foote doth ake,

  Meane time perhaps his head no fellow-feeling take.

.-- --- 1 LUCR. 1. iii. 831. 2 Ib. 463. 3 CIC.  Div. 1. ii. c. 58. 1
LUCR. 1. iii. iii.

Our judgements sight referreth it selfe unto truth, as doth the owles
eyes unto the shining of the sunne, as saith Aristotle. How should we
better convince him than by so grosse blindnesse in so apparent a
light?  For the contrarie opinion of the soules immortalitie, which
Cicero saith to have first beene brought in (at least by the
testimonie of books) by Pherecydes Syrius in the time of King Tullus
(others ascribe the invention thereof to Thales, and other to others)
it is the part of humane knowledge treated most sparingly and with
more doubt.  The most constant Dogmatists (namely in this point) are
enforced to cast themselves under the shelter of the Academikes wings.
No man knowes what Aristotle hath established upon this subject no
more than all the ancients in generall, who handle the same with a
very wavering beliefe: Rem gratissimam promittentium magis quam
probantium: 'Who rather promise than approve a thing most
acceptable. He hath hidden himself under the clouds of intricat and
ambiguous words and unintelligible senses, and hath left his Sectaries
as much cause to dispute upon his judgement as upon the matter.  Two
things made this his opinion plausible to them: the one, that without
the immortality of soules there should no meanes be left to ground or
settle the vaine hopes of glory+; a consideration of wonderfull credit
in the world: the other (as Plato saith) that it is a most profitable
impression, that vices, when they steal away from out the sight and
knowledge of humane justice, remaine ever as a blancke before divine
justice, which even after the death of the guilty will severely pursue
them.  Man is ever possessed with an extreme desire to prolong his
being, and hath to the uttermost of his skill provided for it.  Toombs
and Monuments are for the preservation of his body, and glorie+ for
the continuance of his name.  He hath employed all his wit to frame
him selfe anew (as impatient of his fortune) and to underprop or
uphold himselfe by his inventions.  The soule by reason of her trouble
and imbecility, as unable to subsist of her selfe, is ever and in all
places questing and searching comforts, hopes, foundations and
forraine circumstances, on which she may take hold and settle
herselfe.  And how light and fantasticall soever his invention doth
frame them unto him, he notwithstanding relieth more surely upon them
and more willingly than upon himself: But it is a wonder to see how
the most obstinat in this so just and manifest perswasion of our
spirits immortalitie have found themselves short and unable to
establish the same by their humane forces.  Somnia sunt non docentis
sed optantis: 'These are dreames not of one that teacheth, but wisheth
what he would have:' said an ancient Writer.  Man may by his owne
testimonie know that the truth he alone discovereth, the same he oweth
unto fortune and chance, since even when she is falne into his hands,
he wanteth wherwith to lay hold on her and keepe her; and that this
reason hath not the power to prevaile with it.  All things produced by
our owne discource and sufficiencie, as well true as false, are
subject to uncertaintie and disputation.  It is for the punishment of
our temeritie and instruction of our miserie and incapacitie, that God
caused the trouble, downefall and confusion of Babels Tower.
Whatsoever we attempt without his assistance, whatever we see without
the lampe of his grace, is but vanity and folly: With our weaknes we
corrupt and adulterate the very essence of truth (which is uniforme
and constant when fortune giveth us the possession of it.  What course
soever man taketh of himself, it is Gods permission that he ever
commeth to that confusion whose image he so lively representeth unto
us by the just punishment, wherewith he framed the presumptuous
overweening of Nembroth, and brought to nothing the frivolous
enterprises of the building of his high-towring Pvramis or
Heaven-menacing tower.  Perdam sapientiam sapientium et prudentiam
prudentium reprobabo:/1 'I will destroy the wisdome of the wise, and
reprove the providence of them that are most

----- 1 1 Cor. i. 19.

prudent.' The diversitie of tongues and languages wherewith he
disturbed that worke and overthrew that proudly-raisd Pile; what else
is it but this infinit altercation and perpetual discordance of
opinions and reasons which accompanieth and entangleth the frivolous
frame of mans learning, or vaine building of human science?  Which he
doth most profitably.  Who might containe us, had we but one graine of
knowledge?  This Saint hath done me much pleasure: Ipsa Veritatis
occultatio, aut humilitatis exercitatio est, out elationis attritio:/1
'The very concealing of the profit is either an exercise of humilitie
or a beating downe of arrogancie.' Unto what point of presumption and
insolencie do we not carry our blindnesse and foolishnesse?  But to
returne to my purpose: Verily there was great reason that we should be
beholding to God alone,{Antonio+} and to the benefit of his grace, for
the truth of so noble a beliefe, since from his liberalitie alone we
receive the fruit of immortalitie, which consisteth in enjoying of
eternall blessednesse.  Let us ingenuously confesse that only God and
Faith hath told it us: for it is no lesson of Nature, nor comming from
our reason.  And he that shall both within and without narrowly sift
and curiously sound his being and his forces without this divine
privilege, he that shall view and consider man without flattering him,
shall nor finde nor see either efficacie or facultie in him that
tasteth of any other thing but death and earth.  The more we give, the
more we owe:{grace+} and the more we yeeld unto God, the more
Christian- like doe we. That which the Stoike Philosopher said he held
by the casuall consent of the peoples voice, had it not beene better
he had held it of God? {Antonio+} Cum de animorum aeternitate
disserimus, non leue momentum apud nos habet Consensus hominum, aut
timentium inferos aut colentium.  Vtor hac publica persuasione:/2
'When we discourse of the immortalitie of soules, in my conceit the
consent of those men is of no small authoritie, who either feare or
adore the infernall powers.' This publike persuasion

----- 1 AUGUSTIN, de Civ.  Dei, xi. 22. 2 SEN.  Epist. 117.

I make use of.  Now the weaknes of human arguments on this subject is
very manifestly knowne by the fabulous circumstances they have added
unto the traine of this opinion, to finde out what condition this our
immortalitie was of.  Let us omit the Stoickes. Usuram nobis
largiuntur, tanquam cornicibus: diu mansuros aiunt animos, semper,
negant./1 'They grant us use of life, as is unto Ravens: they say our
soules shall long continue, but they deny they shall last ever.  Who
gives unto soules a life beyond this but finite.'  The most universall
and received fantasie, and which endureth to this day, hath beene that
whereof Pythagoras is made Author, not that he was the first inventor
of it, but because it received much force and credit by the authoritie
of his approbation; which is, that soules, at their departure from us
did but pass and roule from one to another body, from a Lyon to a
Horse, from a Horse to a King, uncessantly wandring up and downe from
House to Mansion.  And himselfe said that he remembred to have been
AEthalides, then Euphorbus, afterward Hermotimus, at last from Pyrrhus
to have passed into Pythagoras; having memorie of himselfe the space
of two hundred and six years: some added more, that the same soules
doe sometimes ascend up to heaven and come downe againe:

  O Pater anne aliquas ad coelum hinc ire putandum est

  Sublimes animas, interumque ad tarda reverti

  Corpora?  Quae lucis miseris tam dira cupido?/2

  Must we thinke (Father) some soules hence doe go,

  Raised to heav'n, thence turne to bodies slow?

  Whence doth so dyre desire of light on wretches grow?

  Origen makes them eternally to go and come from a good to a bad

  estate. The opinion that Varro reporteth is, that in the revolution
  of

  foure hundred and forty yeares they reconjoyned themselves unto
  their

  first bodies.  Chrysippus, that that must come to passe after a

  certaine

space of time unknowne and not limited.  Plato (who saith that he
holds this opinion from Pindarus and from ancient Poesie) of infinite
vicissitudes

---- - 1 CIC.  Tusc.  Qu. 1. i. 2 VIRG.  AEn. 1. vi. 739.

of alteration to which the soule is prepared, having no wearines nor
rewards in the other world but temporall, as her life in this is but t
emporall, concludeth in her a singular knowledge of the affaires of
Heaven, of Hell, and here below, where she hath passed, repassed, and
sojourned in many voyages, a matter in his remembrance.  Beholde her
progresse elsewhere: he that hath lived well reconjoyneth himself unto
that Star or Planet to which he is assigned: who evill, passeth into a
woman: and if then he amend not himself, he trans-changeth himselfe
into a beast of condition agreeing to his vicious customes, and shall
never see an end of his punishments untill he returne to his naturall
condition, and by virtue of reason he have deprived himselfe of those
grose, stupide, and elementarie qualities that were in him.  But I
will not forget the objection which the Epicureans make unto this
transmigration from one body to another: which is very pleasant. They
demand what order there should be if the throng of the dying should be
greater than that of such as be borne.  For the soules removed from
their abode would throng and strive together who should get the best
seat in this new case: and demand besides what they would pass their
time about, whilst they should stay untill any other mansion were made
ready for them: Or contrary-wise, if more creatures were borne than
should dye, they say bodies shall be in an ill taking, expecting the
infusion of their soule, and it would come to passe that some of them
should dye before they had ever been living.

  Denique connubia ad veneris, partusque ferarunt,

  Esse animas praesto deridiculum esse videtur,

  Et spectare immortales mortalia membra

  Innumero numero, certareque praeproperanter

  Inter se, quae prima potissimaque insinuetur./1

  Lastly, ridiculous it is, soules should be prest

  To Venus meetings, and begetting of a beast:

  That they to mortall lims immortall be addrest

  In number numberlesse, and over-hasty strive,

  Which of them first and chiefe should get in there to live.


----- 1 LUCR. 1. iii. 802.

Others have staid the soule in the deceased bodies, therewith to
animate serpents, wormes, and other beasts, which are said to engender
from the corruption of our members, yea, and from our ashes: others
divide it in two parts, one mortall, another immortall: others make it
corporeall, and yet notwithstanding immortall: others make it
immortall, without any science or knowledge.  Nay, there are some of
ours who have deemed that of condemned mens souls divels were made: as
Plutarke+ thinks, that Gods are made of those soules which are saved:
for there be few things that this author doth more resolutely averre
then this; holding every where else an ambiguous and doubtfull kind of
speech.  It is to be imagined and firmlie believed (saith he) that the
soules of men, vertuous both according unto nature and divine justice,
become of Men, Saints, and of Saints, Demi-Gods, and after they are
once perfectly, as in sacrifices of purgation, cleansed and purified
{Dante+} being delivered from all possibility and mortalitie, become,
of Demi-Gods (not by any civill ordinance, but in good truth, and
according to manifest reason) perfect and very very Gods; receiving a
most blessed and thrice glorious end.  But whosoever shall see him who
is notwithstanding one of the most sparing and moderate of that
faction, so undantedly to skirmish, and will beare him relate his
wonders upon this subject, him I refer to his discourse of the Moone,
and of Socrates his Daemon; where as evidently as in any other place,
may be averred that the mysteries of Philosophy have many strange
conceits, common with those of Poesie; mans understanding losing it
selfe once goes about to sound and controule all things to the utmost
ende; as, tired and troubled by a long and wearisome course of our
life, we returne to a kind of doting childhood.  Note here the goodly
and certaine instructions which concerning our soules-subject we drawe
from humane knowledge.  There is no lesse rashnesse in that which shee
teacheth us touching our corporall parts.  Let us make choyce but of
one or two examples, else should we lose our selves in this
troublesome and vaste Ocean of Physicall errours.  Let us know whether
they agree but in this one, that is to say, of what matter men are
derived and produced one from another.  For, touching their first
production, it is no marvell if in a thing so high and so ancient mans
wit is troubled and confounded.  Archelaus, the Physitian, to whom (as
Aristoxenus affirmeth) Socrates was disciple and Minion, assevered
that both men and beasts had beene made of milkie slime or mudde,
expressed by the heate of the earth.  Pythagoras saith that our seed
is the scumme or froth of our best blood: Plato, the distilling of the
marrow in the back-bone, which he argueth thus because that place
feeleth first the wearinesse which followeth the generative businesse.
Alcmaeon, a part of the braine substance, which to prove he saith
their eyes are ever most troubled that over-intemperately addict
themselves to that exercise.  Democritus, a substance extracted from
all parts of this corporall Masse.  Epicurus, extracted from the last
soule and the body.  Aristotle, an excrement drawne from the
nourishment of the blood, the last scattereth it selfe in our severall
members; others, blood, concocted and digested by the heate of the
genitories, which they judge because in the extreme, earnest, and
forced labours, many shed drops of pure blood; wherein some appearance
seemeth to be, if from so infinit a confusion any likelihood may be
drawne.  But to bring this seed to effect, how many contrary opinions
make they of it?  Aristotle and Democritus hold that women have no
sperme, that it is but a sweate, which by reason of the pleasure and
frication they cast forth, and availeth nothing in generation.  Galen
and his adherents contrariwise, affirme that there can be no
generation except two seeds meete together.  Behold the Physitians,
the Philosophers, the Lawyers, and the Divines pell-mell together by
the eares with our women about the question and disputation how long
women beare their fruite in their wombe.  And as for me, by mine owne
example, I take their part that maintaine a woman may go eleven months
with childe. The worlde is framed of this experience, there is no
meane woman so simple that cannot give her censure upon all these
contestations, although we could not agree.  This is sufficient to
verifie that in the corporall part man is no more instructed of
himselfe than in the spirituall.  We have proposed himselfe to
himselfe, and his reason to reason, to see what shee shall tell us of
it.  Mee thinkes I have sufficiently declared how little understanding
shee hath of herselfe.  And hee who hath no understanding of himselfe,
what can he have understanding of? Quasi vero mensuram ullius rei
possit agere qui sui nesciat: 'As though he could take measure of any
thing that knowes not his owne measure'.  Truely Protagoras told us
prettie tales, when hee makes a man the measure of all things, who
never knew so much as his owne.  If it be not hee, his dignitie will
never suffer any other creature to have this advantage over him.  Now
he being so contrary in himselfe, and one judgement so uncessantly
subverting another, this favorable proposition was but a jest, which
induced us necessarily to conclude the nullity of the Compasse and the
Compasser.  When Thales judgeth the knowledge of man very hard unto
man, he teacheth him the knowledge of all other things to be
impossible unto him.  You for whom I have taken the paines to enlarge
so long a worke (against my custome) will not shun to maintaine your
Sebond with the ordinary forme of arguing, whereof you are daily
instructed, and will therein exercise both your minde and study; for
this last trick of sense must not be employed but as an extreme
remedy.  It is a desperate thrust, gainst which you must forsake your
weapons, to force your adversary to renounce his, and a secret slight,
which must seldome and very sparingly be put in practice.  It is a
great fond hardnesse to lose our selfe for the losse of another.  A
man must not be willing to die to revenge+ himselfe, as Gobrias was:
who being close by the eares

----- 1 PLIN.  Nat.  Hist. 1. ii. c. 1.

with a Lord of Persia, Darius chanced to come in with his sword in his
hand, and fearing to strike for feare he should hurt Gobrias, he
called unto him, and bade him smite boldly, although he should smite
through both./1 I have heard armes and conditions of single combates
being desperate, and in which he that offered them put not himselfe
and his enemie in danger of an end inevitable to both, reproved as
unjust, and condemned as unlawfull. The Portugais took once certaine
Turkes prisoners in the Indian Seas, who, impatient of their capacity,
resolved with themselves (and their resolution succeeded) by rubbing
of Ship- nailes one against another, and causing sparkes of fire to
fall amongst the barrels of powder (which lay not far from them) with
intent to consume both themselves, their masters, and the ship.  We
but touch at the skirts, and glance at the last closings of the
Sciences, wherein extremity, as well as in vertue, is vicious.  Keepe
your selves in the common path, it is not good to be so subtil and so
curious.{PlainDealer+} Remember what the Italian proverbe saith,

  Chi troppo assottiglia, si scavezza./2

  Who makes himselfe too fine,

  Doth break himselfe in fine.


I perswade you, in your opinions and discourses, as much as in your
customes, and in every other thing to use moderation and temperance,
and avoide all newfangled inventions and strangenesse. All extravagant
waies displease me.  You, who by the authoritie and preheminence which
your greatnesse hath laied upon you, and more by the advantages which
the qualities that are most your owne, bestow on you, may with a nod
command whom you please, should have laied this charge upon some one
that had made profession of learning, who might otherwise have
disposed and enriched this fantasie.  Notwithstanding here you have
enoughto supply your wants of it.  Epicurus said of the lawes that the
worst were so necessary unto us, that without them men would

----- 1 JUSTIN, 1. i. 2 PETR. p. i. canz. xiii. 48.

enterdevour one another.  And Plato verifieth that without lawes we
should live like beasts. {Yahoo+} Our spirit is a vagabond, a
dangerous and fond-hardy implement; it is very harde to joyne order
and measure to it.  In my time, such as have any rare excellency above
others, or extraordinary vivacity, we see them almost all so lavish
and unbridled in licence of opinions and manners, as it may be counted
a wonder to find any one settled and sociable. There is great reason
why the spirit of man should be so strictly embarred. In his study, as
in all things else, he must have his steps numbered and ordered.  The
limits of his pursuite must be cut out by art.  He is bridled and
fettered with and by religions, lawes, customes, knowledge, precepts,
paines, and recompences, both mortall and immortall; {Kurtz+} yet we
see him, by meanes of his volubility and dissolution, escape all these
bonds. It is a vaine body that hath no way about him to be seized on
or cut off: a diverse and deformed body, on which neither knot nor
hold may be fastened.{Yahoo+} Verily there are few soules so orderly,
so constante and so well borne as may be trusted with their owne
conduct, and may not with moderation, and without rashnes, faile in
the liberty of their judgements beyond common opinions.  It is more
expedient to give some body the charge and tuition of them.  The
spirit is an outrageous glaive, yea even to his owne possessor, except
he have the grace very orderly and discreetly to arme himselfe
therewith. And there is no beast to whom one may more justly apply a
blinding bord, to keepe her sight in and force her to her footing, and
keepe from straying here and there, without the tracke which use and
lawes trace her out. {Kurtz+} Therefore shall it be better for you to
close and bound your selves in the accustomed path, however it be,
than to take your flight to this unbridled licence.  But if any one of
these new doctors shall undertake to play the wise or ingenious before
you, at the charge of his and your health: to rid you out of this
dangerous plague, which daily more and more spreds it selfe in your
Courts this preservative will in any extreame necessity, be a let,
that the contagion of this venome shall neither offend you nor your
assistance.  The liberty then, and the jollity of their ancient
spirits brought forth many different Sects of opinions, in Philosophy
and humane Sciences: every one undertaking to judge and chuse, so he
might raise a faction.  But now that men walke all one way: Qui certis
quibusdam destinatisque sententiis addicti et consecrate sunt, ut
etiam quae non probant, cogantur defendere:/1 'Who are addicted and
consecrated to certaine set and fore-decreed opinions, so as they are
enforced to maintaine those things which they prove or approve not:'
And that wee receive Arts by civill authority and appointment: so that
Schooles have but one patterne, alike circumscribed discipline and
institution; no man regardeth more what coines weigh and are worth;
but every man in his turne receiveth them according to the value that
common approbation and succession allotteth them: Men dispute no
longer of the alloy, but of the use.  So are all things spent and
vented like. Physike is received as Geometry: and jugling tricks,
encjantments, bonds, the commerce of deceased spirits,
prognostications, domifications, yea even this ridiculous wit and
wealth-consuming pursuite of the Philosophers stone, all is emploied
and uttered without contradiction.  It sufficeth to know that Mars his
place lodgeth in the middle of the hands triangle; that of Venus in
the thumme; and Mercuries in the little finger: and when the
table-line cutteth the fore- finger's rising, it is a signe of
cruelty: when it falleth under the middle finger, and that the
naturall median-line makes an angle with the vitall, under the same
side, it is a signe of a miserable death: and when a womans naturall
line is open, and closes not its angle with the vitall, it evidenty
denotes that she will not be very chast.  I call your selfe to
witnesse, if with this Science onely, a man may not passe with
reputation and favour among all companies.  Theophrastus was wont to
say that mans knowledge, directed by the sense, might judge of the
causes of things unto 1 CIC.  Tusc.  Qu. 1. ii.  a certaine measure,
but being come to the extream and first causes, it must necessarily
stay, and be blunted or abated, either by reason of its weaknesse or
of the things difficulty.  It is an indifferent and pleasing kind of
opinion to thinke that our sufficiency may bring us to the knowledge
of some things, and hath certaine measures of power beyond which it's
temerity to employ it.  This opinion is plausible and brought in by
way of composition: but it is hard to give our spirit any limits,
being very curious and greedy, and not tied to stay rather at a
thousand then at fifty spaces.  Having found by experience that if one
had mist to attaine unto some one thing, another hath come unto it,
and that which one age never knew, the age succeeding hath found out:
and that Sciences and Arts are not cast in a mold, but rather by
little and little formed and shaped by often handling and polishing
them over: even as beares fashion their yong whelps by often licking
them: what my strength cannot discover, I cease not to sound and try:
and in handling and kneading this new matter, and with removing and
chasing it, I open some faculty for him that shall follow me, that
with more ease he may enjoy the same, and make it more facile, more
supple and more pliable:

  -----vt hymettia sole

  Cera remollescit, tractataque pollice, multas

  Vertitur in facies, ipsoque fit vtilis vsu./1

  As the best Bees wax melteth by the Sun,

  And handling, into many formes doth run,

  And is made aptly fit

  For use by using it.

As much will the second do for the third, which is a cause that
difficulty doth not make me despaire, much lesse my unability: for it
is but mine owne.  Man is as well capable of all things as of
some. And if (as Theophrastus saith) he avow the ignorance of the
first causes and beginnings, let him boldly quit all the rest of his
knowledge.  If his foundation faile him, his

----- 1 OVID.  Metam. 1. x. 284.

discourse is overthrowne.  The dispute hath no other scope, and to
  enquire no other end but the principles: If this end stay not his
  course, he casteth himself into an infinite irresolution.  Non
  potest aliud alio magis minusque comprehendi, quoiam omnium reram
  vna est definitio comprehendendi: 'One thing can neither more nor
  lesse be comprehended than another, since of all things there is one
  definition of comprehending.  Now it is likely that if the soule
  knew any thing, shee first know her selfe: and if she knew any
  without and besides her selfe, it must be her vaile and body before
  any thing else.  If even at this day the Gods of Physicke are seene
  to wrangle about our Anatomie, Mulciber in Troiam, pro Troia stabat
  Apollo,/1 Apollo stood for Troy, Vulcan Troy to destroy, when shall
  we expect that they will be agreed?  We are neerer unto our selves,
  then is whitenesse unto snow or weight unto a stone.  If man know
  not himselfe, how can hee know his functions and forces?  It is not
  by fortune that some true notice doth not lodge with us but by
  hazard.  And forasmuch as by the same way, fashion and conduct,
  errours are received into our soule, she hath not wherewithall to
  distinguish them, nor whereby to chose the truth from falshood.  The
  Academikes received some inclination of judgment and found it over
  raw, to say, it was no more likely snow should be white then blacke,
  and that wee should be no more assured of the moving of a stone,
  which goeth from our hand, then of that of the eighth Spheare.  And
  to avoid this difficultie and strangenesse, which in truth cannot
  but hardly lodge in our imagination, howbeit they establish that we
  were no way capable of knowledge, and that truth is engulfed in the
  deepest Abysses, where mans sight can no way enter; yet avowed they
  some things to be more likely and possible then others, and receivd
  this faculty in their judgement

----- 1 OVID.  Trist. 1. i.  El. ii. 5.

that they might rather incline to one apparence then to another.  They
allowed her this propension, interdicting her all resolution.  The
Pyrrhonians advise is more hardy, and therewithall more likely.  For
this Academicall inclination, and this propension rather to one then
another proposition, what else is it then a recognition of some more
apparant truth, in this than in that?  If our understanding be capable
of the forme, of the lineaments, of the behaviour and face of truth,
it might as well see it all compleat, as but halfe, growing and
imperfect.  For this apparance of verisimilitude which makes them
rather take the left then the right hand, doe you augment it; this one
ounce of likelihood, which turnes the ballance, doe you multiply it by
a hundred, nay by a thousand ounces; it wil in the end come to passe
that the ballance will absolutely resolve and conclude one choice and
perfect truth.  But how doe they suffer themselves to be made
tractable by likelihood, if they know not truth?  How know they the
semblance of that whereof they understand not the essence?  Either we
are able to judge absolutely, or absolutely we cannot.  If our
intellectuall and sensible faculties are without ground or footing, if
they but hull up and downe and drive with the wind, for nothing suffer
we our judgment to be carried away to any part of their operation,
what apparauce soever it seemeth to present us with.  And the surest
and most happy situation of our understanding should be that, where
without any tottering or agitation it might maintaine it selfe setled,
upright and inflexible.  Inter visa, vera, aut falsa, ad animi
assensum, nihil interest:/1 'There is no difference betwixt true and
false visions concerning the mindes assent.'  That things lodge not in
us in their proper forme and essence, and make not their entrance into
us of their owne power and authority, we see it most evidently.  For
if it were so, we would receive them all alike: wine should be such in
a sicke mans mouth as in a healthy mans.  He whose fingers are chopt
through cold, and stiffe or benummed with

----- 1 CIC.  Acad.  Qu. 1. iv.

frost, should find the same hardnesse in the wood or iron he might
handle, which another doth.  Then strange subjects yeeld unto our
mercy, and lodge with us according to our pleasure.  Now if on our
part we receive any thing without alteration, if mans holdfasts were
capable and sufficiently powerfull by our proper meanes to seize on
truth, those meanes being common to all; this truth would successively
remove it selfe from one to another.  And of so many things as are in
the world, at least one should be found, that by an universall consent
should be beleeved of all.  But that no proposition is seene, which is
not controversied and debated amongst us, or that may not be,
declareth plainly that our judgment doth not absolutely and clearly
seize on that which it seizeth: for my judgment cannot make my
fellowes judgment to receive the same: which is a signe that I have
seized upon it by some other meane then by a naturall power in me or
other men.  Leave we apart this infinite confusion of opinions, which
is seene amonge Philosophers themselves, and this universal and
perpetuall disputation, in and concerning the knowledge of things.
For it is most truly presupposed that men (I mean the wisest, the best
borne, yea and the most sufficient do never agree; no not so much that
heaven is over our heads.  For they who doubt of all, doe also doubt
of this: and such as affirme that we cannot conceive any thing, say we
have not conceived whether heaven be over our heads; which two
opinions are in number (without any comparison) the most
forcible. Besides this diversity and infinite division, by reason of
the trouble which our owne judgement layeth upon our selves, and the
uncertainty which every man findes in himselfe, it may manifestly be
perceived that this situation is very uncertaine and unstaid.  How
diversely judge we of things? How often change we our phantasies?
What I hold and beleeve this day I beleeve and hold with all my
beleefe: all my implements, springs and motions, embrace and claspe
this opinion, and to the utmost of their power warrant the same: I
could not possibly embrace any verity, nor with more assurance keepe
it, than I doe this.  I am wholy and absolutely given to it: but hath
it not beene my fortune, not once, but a hundred, nay a thousand
times, nay daily, to have embraced some other thing with the very same
instruments and condition which upon better advise I have afterward
judged false?  A man should, at the least become wise at his owne
cost, and learne by others harmes.  If under this colour I have often
found my selfe deceived, if my Touch-stone be commonly found false and
my ballance un-even and unjust; what assurance may I more take of it
at this time than at others?  Is it not folly in me to suffer my selfe
so often to be beguiled and couzened by one guide?  Neverthelesse, let
fortune remove us five hundred times from our place, let her doe
nothing but incessantly empty and fill, as in a vessell, other and
other opinions in our mind, the present and last is alwaies supposed
certaine and infallible.  For this must a man have goods, honour,
life, state, health and all:

  -----posterior res illa reperta

  Perdit; et immutat sensus ad pristina guaeque./1

  The latter thing destroies all found before;

  And alters sense at all things lik'd of yore.

Whatsoever is told us, and what ever we learne, we should ever
remember: it is man that delivereth and man that receiveth: it is a
mortall hand that presents it, and a mortall hand that receives it.
Onely things which come to us from heaven have right and authority of
perswasion and markes of truth: which we neither see with our eyes nor
receive by our meanes: this sacred and great image would be of no
force in so wretched a Mansion except God prepare it to that use and
purpose, unlesse God by his particular grace and supernaturall favor
reforme and strengthen the same.  Our fraile and defective condition
ought at least make us demeane our selves more moderately and more
circumspectly in our changes.  We should remember that

----- 1 LUCR. 1. v. 1424.

whatsoever we receive in our understanding we often receive false
things, and that it is by the same instruments which many times
contradict and deceive themselves.  And no marvell if they contradict
themselves, being so easy to encline, and upon very slight occasions
subject to waver and turne.  Certaine it is that our apprehension, our
judgement, and our soules faculties in generall, doe suffer according
to the bodies motions and alterations, which are continuall.  Have we
not our spirits more vigilant, our memorie more ready, and our
discourses more lively in time of health then in sicknesse? Doth not
joy and blithenesse make us receive the subjects that present
themselves unto our soule, with another kind of countenance, then
lowring vexation and drooping melancholy doth?  Doe you imagine that
Catullus or Saphoes verses delight and please an old covetous
chuff-penny wretch as they do a lusty and vigorous yong man?
Cleomenes the sonne of Anaxandridas being sick, his friends reproved
him, saying he had new strange humors and unusuall phantasies: 'It is
not unlikely,' answered he, 'for I am not the man I was wont to be in
the time of health; but being other, so are my fantasies and my
humors.  In the rabble case- canvasing of our plea-courts this byword,
Gaudeat de bona fortuna: 'Let him joy in his good fortune" is much in
use, and is spoken of criminall offenders, who happen to meete with
Judges in some milde temper or well-pleased mood.  For it is most
certaine that in times of condemnation the Judges doome or sentence is
sometimes perceived to be more sharpen mercilesse and forward, and at
other times more tractable, facile, and enclined to shadow or excuse
an offence, according as he is well or ill pleased in mind.  A man
that commeth out of his house troubled with the paine of the goute,
vexed with jealousy, or angry that his servant hath robbed him, and
whose mind is overcome with griefe, and plunged with vexation, and
distracted with anger, there is not question to be made but his
judgement is at that instant distempred, and much transported that
way.  That venerable senate of the Areopagites was wont to judge and
sentence by night, for feare the sight of the suters might corrupt
justice.  The ayre it selfe, and the clearenes of the firmament, doth
forbode us some change and alteration of weather, as saith that Greek
verse in Cicero:

  Tales sunt hominum mentes, quali pater ipse

  Iupiter auctifera lustravit lampade terras./1

  Such are mens mindes, as with increasefull light

  Our father Jove survaies the world in sight.

It is not onely fevers, drinkes and great accidents, that over-whelme
our judgement: the least things in the world will turne it
topsie-turvie.  And although we feele it not, it is not to bee
doubted, if a continuall a ague may in the end suppresse our mind, a
tertian will also (according to her measure and proportion) breed some
alteration in it.  If an Apoplexie doth altogether stupifie and
extinguish the sight of our understanding, it is not to be doubted but
a cold and rheum will likewise dazle the same.  And by consequence,
hardly shall a man in all his life find one houre wherein our
judgement may alwaies be found in his right byase, our body being
subject to so many continuall alterations, and stuft with so divers
sorts of ginnes and motions, that, giving credit to Physitians, it is
very hard to find one in perfect plight, and that doth not alwaies
mistake his marke and shute wide.  As for the rest, this disease is
not so easily discovered, except it be altogether extreame and
remedilesse; forasmuch as reason marcheth ever crooked, halting and
broken-hipt; and with falshood as with truth; and therefore it is very
hard to discover her mistaking and disorder.  I alwaies call reason
that apparance or shew of discourses which every man deviseth or
forgeth in himselfe: that reason, of whose condition there may be a
hundred, one contrary to another, about one selfe same subject: it is
an instrument of lead and wax, stretching, pliable, and that may be
fitted to all byases and squared to all

----- 1 CIC. ex Incert.

measures: there remaines nothing but the skill and sufficiency to know
how to turne and winde the same.  How well soever a Judge meaneth, and
what good mind so ever he beareth, if diligent care be not given unto
him (to which few ammuse themselves) his inclination unto friendship,
unto kindred, unto beauty, and unto revenge, and not onely matters of
so weighty consequence, but this innated and casual instinct which us
to favour one thing more than another, and encline to one man more
than to another, and which, without any leave or reason, giveth us the
choice in two like subjects, or some shadow of like vanity, may
insensibly insinuate in his judgment the commendation and applause, or
disfavour and disallowance of a cause, and give the ballance a twitch.
I that nearest prie into my selfe, and who have mine eyes uncessantly
fixt upon me as one that hath not much else to do else where,.

  Quis sub Arcto

  Rex gelidae metuatur orae,

  Quid Tyridatem terreat unice

  Securus,/1

  Only secure, who in cold coast

  Under theNorth-pole rules the rost,

  And there is feare or what would fright,

  And Tyridates put to flight,


dare very hardly report the vanity and weaknesse I feele in myselfe.
My foot is so staggering and unstable and I finde it so ready to trip
and so easie to stumble and my sight is so dimme and uncertaine that
fasting I find my selfe other than full fed.  If my health applaud me,
or but the calmenesse of one faire day smile upon me, then am I a
lusty gallant; but if a corne wring my toe, then am I pouting,
unpleasant and hard to be pleased. One same pace of a horse is
sometimes hard and sometimes easie unto me; and one same way, one time
short, another time long and wearisome; and one same forme, now more,
now lesse agreeable and pleasing to me: sometimes I am apt to doe

----- 1 HOR. 1. i.  Od. xxvi. 3.

any thing, and other times fit to doe nothing: what now is pleasing to
me within a while after will be paineful.  There are a thousand
indiscreet and casuall agitations in me.  Either a melancholy humour
possesseth me, or a cholericke passion swaieth me, which having shaken
off, sometimes frowardilesse and peevishnesse hath predominancy, and
other times gladnes and blithnesse overrule me.  If I chance to take a
booke in hand I shall in some passages perceive some excellent graces,
and which ever wound me to the soule with delight; but let me lay it
by and read him another time; let me turne and tosse him as I list,
let me apply and manage him as I will, I shall finde it an unknowne
and shapelesse masse.  Even in my writings I shall not at all times
finde the tracke or ayre of my first imaginations; I wot not my selfe
what I would have said, and shall vexe and fret my selfe in correcting
and giving a new sense to them, because I have peradventure forgotten
or lost the former, which happily was better.  I doe but come and goe;
my judgement doth not alwaies goe forward, but is ever floting and
wandering.

  ----- velut minuta magno

  Deprensa navis in mari, vesaniente vento./1


  Much like a pettie skiffe, that's taken short

  In a grand Sea, when winds doe make mad sport.

Many times (as commonly it is my hap to doe) having for exercise and
sport-sake undertaken to maintaine an opinion contrarie to mine, my
minde applying and turning it selfe that way doth so tie me unto it,
as I finde no more the reason of my former conceit, and so I leave it.
Where I encline, thereeI entertains my selfe howsoever it be, and am
carried away by mine owne weight.  Every man could neer-hand say as
much of himselfe would he but looke into himselfe as I doe.  Preachers
know that the emotion which surpriseth them whilst they are in their
earnest speech doth animate them towards belief, and that being

----- 1 CATUL.  Lyr.  Epig. xxii. 12.

angrie we more violently give our selves to defend our proposition,
emprint it in our selves, and embrace the same with more vehemencie
and approbation than we did being in our temperate and reposed sense.
You relate simply your case unto a Lawyer; he answers faltring and
doubtfully unto it, whereby you perceive it is indifferent unto him to
defend either this or that side, all is one to him. {lawyers+} Have
you paid him well, have you given him a good baite or fee to make him
earnestly apprehend it, beginnes he to be enterested in the matter, is
his will moved or his minde enflamed? Then will his reason be moved
and his knowledge enflamed with all.  See then an apparent and
undoubted truth presents it self to his understanding, wherein he
discovers a new light, and believes it in good sooth, and so perswades
himselfe.  Shall I tell you?  I wot not whether the heate proceedingk
of spight and obstinacie against the impression and violence of a
magistrate and of danger: or the interest of reputation have induced
some man to maintaine, even in the fiery flames, the opinion for which
amongst his friends and at libertie he would never have beene moved
nor have ventured his fingers end.  The motions and fits which our
soule receiveth by corporall passions doe greatly prevaile in her, but
more her owne, with which it is so fully possest, as happily it may be
maintained she hath no other or motion than by the blasts of her
windes, and that without their agitation she should remaine without
action, as a ship at sea which the winds have utterly forsaken.{Pope+}
And he who should maintaine that following the Peripatetike faction
should offer us no great wrong, since it is knowne that the greatest
number of the soules actions proceede and have neede of this impulsion
of passion; valor (say they) cannot be perfected without the
assistance of choler.{anger+}

  Semper Aiax fortis, fortissimus tamen in furore./1

  Ajax every valor had,

  Most then, when he was most mad.


----- 1 CIC.  Tusc.  Qu. 1. iv.


Nor doth any man run violently enough upon the wicked, or his enemies,
except he be throughly angrie; and they are of opinion that an
advocate or counsellor at the barre, to have the cause goe on his
side, and to have justice at the judges hands, doth first endevor to
provoke him to anger.  Longing-desires moved Themistocles and urged
Demosthenes, and have provoked Philosophers to long travels, to
tedious watchings, and to lingring peregrinations and leads us to
honours, to doctrine, and to health: all profitable respects.  And
this demissenes of the soule in suffering molestion and tediousness,
serveth to no other purpose, but to breed repentance and cause
penitence in our consciences, and for our punishment to feele the
scourge of God and the rod of politike correction.  Compassion serveth
as a sting unto clemencie, and wisdome to preserve and governe our
selves, is by our owne feare rouzed up; and how many noble actions by
ambition, how many by presumption.  To conclude, no eminent or
glorious vertue can be without some immoderate and irregular
agitation. {Pope+} May not this be one of the reasons which moved the
Epicureans to discharge God of all care and thought of our affaires:
forsomuch as the very effects of his goodnesse cannot exercise
themselves towards us without disturbing his rest by meanes of the
passions+ which are as motives and solicitations directing the soule
to vertuous actions?  Or have they thought otherwise, and take them as
tempests which shamefully lead astray the soule from her rest and
tranquillitie? Vt maris tranquillita intelligitur, nulla, ne minima
quidem, aura fluctus, commovente: Sic animi quietus et placatus status
cernitur, quam perturbatio nulla est, quw moveri queat:/1 'As we
conceive the seas calmnesse, when not so much as the least pirling
wind doth stirre the waves, so is a peaceable reposed state of the
mind then seene when there is no perturbation whereby it may be
moved.'  What differences of sense and reason, what contrarietie of
imaginations doth the diversitie of our passions present unto us?
What

----- 1 CIC.  Tusc.  Qu. 1. v.


assurance may we then take of so unconstant and wavering a thing,
subject by its owne condition to the power of trouble, never marching
but a forced and borrowed pace?  If our judgement be in the hands of
sickenes itselfe and of perturbation; if by rashnesse and folly it be
retained to receive the impression of things, what assurance may we
expect at his hands?  Dares not Philosophie thinke that men produce
their greatest effects, and neerest approaching to divinity when they
are besides themselves, furious, and madde?  We amend our selves by
the privation of reason, and by her drooping. The two naturall waies
to enter the cabinet of the Gods, and there to foresee the course of
the destinies, are furie and sleepe.  This is very pleasing to be
considered.  By the dislocation that passions bring into our reason,
we become vertuous; by the extirpation which either furie or the image
of death bringeth us, we become Prophets and Divines.  I never
beleeved it more willingly.  It is a meere divine inspiration that
sacred truth hath inspired in a Philosophical spirit which against his
proposition exacteth from him; that the quiet state of our soule, the
best-settled estate, yea the healthfullesi that Philosophy can acquire
unto it, is not the best estate.  Our vigilancie is more drouzie then
asleepe it selfe: our wisdome lesse wise then folly; our dreames of
more worth then our discourses.  The worst place we can take is in
ourselves.  But thinks it not that we have the foresight to marke,
that the voice which the spirit uttereth when he is gone from man so
cleare sighted, so great, and so perfect, and whilst he is in man so
earthly, so ignorant, and so overclouded, is a voice proceeding from
the spirit which is in earthly, ignorant, and overclouded man; and
therefore a trustles and not to be-believed voice?  I have no great
experience in these violent agitations, being of a soft and dull
complexion, the greatest part of which, without giving it leisure to
acknowledge her selfe, doe sodainely surprise our soule.  But that
passion, which in young mens harts is saied to be produced by
idleness, although it march but leasurely and with a measured
progress, doth evidently present to those that have assaid to oppose
themselves against her endevour, the power of the conversion and
alteration which our judgement suffereth.  I have some times
enterprised to arme my selfe with a resolution to abide, resist, and
suppresse the same.  For I am so farre from being in their ranke that
call and allure vices, that unlesse they draw me I scarcely follow
them. I felt it mauger my resistance, to breed, to growe, and to
augment; and in the end, being in perfect health and cleare sighted,
to seize upon and pollute me; in such sort that as in drunkennes the
image of things began to appeare unto me otherwise then it was wont.
I saw the advantages of the subject I sought after evidently to swell
and grow greater, and much to encrease by the winde of my imagination;
and the difficulties of my enterprise to become more easie and plaine,
and my discourse and conscience to shrinke and draw backe.  But that
fire being evaporated all on a sodaine, as by the flashing of a
lightning, my soule to reassume an other sight, an other state, and
other judgement.  The difficultie in my retreate seemed great and
invincible, and the very same things of another taste and shew than
the fervency of desire had presented them unto me.  And which more
truly, Pyrrho cannot tell.  We are never without some infirmitie.
Fevers have their heat and their cold: from the effects of a burning
passion, we fall into the effects of a chilling passion.  So much as I
had cast my selfe forward, so much doe I draw my selfe backe.

  Qualis ubi alterno procurrens gurgite pontus,

  Nunc ruit ad terrar, scopilisque superjacit undam,

  Spumeus, extremamque sinu prefundit arenam,

  Nunc rapidus retro, atque aestu rvoluta resorbens

  Saxa, fugit, littusque vado labente relinquit./1

  As th' Ocean flowing, ebbing in due course,

  To land now rushes, foming throws his fource

  On rocks, therewith bedewes the utmost sand,

  Now swift returns the stones rowld backe from strand

  By tide resucks, foord failing, leaves the land.


----- 1 VIRG.  AEn. 1. xi. 508.


Now by the knowledge of my volubilitie, I have by accident engendred
some constancy of opinions in my selfe; yea have not so much altered
my first and naturall ones.  For, what apparance soever there be in
novelty, I do not easily change for feare I should lose by the
bargaine: and since I am not capable to chuse, I take the choice from
others; and keepe my selfe in the seate that God hath placed me in.
Else could I hardly keepe my selfe from continuall rowling.  Thus have
I by the Grace of God preserved my selfe whole (without agitation or
trouble of conscience) in the ancient beliefe of our religion, in the
middest of so many sects and divisions which our age hath brought
forth.  The writings of the ancient fathers (I meane the good, the
solide, and the serious) doe tempt, and in a manner remove me which
way they list.  Him that I heare seemeth ever the most forcible.  I
finde them everie one in his turne to have reason, although they
contrary one another.  That facility which good witts have to prove
any thing they please likel; and that there is nopthing so strange but
that they will undertake to set so good a gloss on it, as it shall
easily deceive a simplicity like unto mine, doth manifestly shew the
weaknesse of their proofe.  The heavens and the planets have moved
these three thousand yeares, and all the world beleeved as much,
untill Cleanthes the Samian, or else (according to Theophrastus)
Nicetas the Syracusian tooke upon him to maintaine, it was the earth
that moved, by the oblique circle of the Zodiake, turning about her
axell tree.  And in our daies Copernicus hath so well grounded this
doctrine, that hee doth orderly fit it to all astrologicall
consequences.  What shall we reape by it but only that wee neede not
care which of the two it be?  And who knoweth whether a thousand
yeares hence a third opinion will rise, which happily shall overthrow
these two precedents?

  Sic volvenda aetas vommutat tempora rerum,

  Quodque fuit pretio, fit nullo denique honore,

  Porro aliud succedit, et contemptibus exit,

  Inque dies magis appetitur, floretque repertum Laudibus, et miro est
  mortales inter honore./1

  So age to be past-over alters times of things:

  What earst was most esteem'd,

  At last nought-worth is deem'd:

  Another then succeeds, and from contempt upsprings,

  Is daily more desir'd, flowreth as found but then

  With praise and wondrous honor amongst mortall men.


So when any new doctrine is represented unto us, we have great cause
to suspect it, and to consider how, before it was invented, the
contrary unto it was in credit; and as that hath beene reversed by
this latter, a third invention may peradventure succeed in afterages,
which in like sort shall front the second.  Before the principles
which Aristotle found out were in credit, other principles contented
mans reason as his doe now content us.  What learning have these men,
what particular priviledge, that the course of our invention should
rely only upon them, and that the possession of our beliefe shall for
ever hereafter belong to them?  They are no more exempted from being
rejected than were their fore-fathers. If any man urge me with a new
argument, it is in me to imagine that, if I cannot answere it, another
can.  For, to believe all apparences which we cannot resolve, is meere
simplicitie+. It would then follow that all the common sort (whereof
we are all part) {diffident+} should have his beliefe turning and
winding like a weather-cocke: for, his soule being soft and without
resistance, should uncessantly be enforced to receive new and admit
other impressions: the latter ever defacing the precedents trace.  He
that perceiveth himselfe weake, ought to answer, according to law
termes, that he will conferre with his learned counsel, or else
referre himselfe to the wisest, from whom he hath had his
prentiseship.  How long is it since physicke came first into the
world?  It is reported that a new start-up fellow, whom they call
Paracelsus, changeth and subverteth all the order of ancient and so
long received rules, and maintaineth that untill this day it

----- 1 LUCR. 1. v. 1286.

bath only served to kill people.  I thinke he will easily verify
it. But I suppose it were no great wisedome to hazard my life upon the
triall of his newfangled experience. 'We must not beleeve all men,'
saith the precept, since every man may say all things.  It is not long
since that one of these professours of novelties and physical
reformations told me that all our forefathers had notoriously abused
themselves in the nature and motion of the winds, which, if I should
listen unto him, he would manifestly make me perceive.  After I had
with some patience given attendance to his arguments, which were
indeed full of likelyhood, I demanded of him whether they which had
sailed according to Theophrastus his lawes, went westward when they
bent their course eastward?  Or whether they sailed sideling or
backward? 'It is fortune,' answered he, 'but so it is, they tooke
their marke amisse:' To whom I then replied that I would rather follow
the effects than his reason.  They are things that often shock
together: and it hath beene told mee that in geometry (which supposeth
to have gained the high point of certainty amongst all sciences) there
are found unavoidable demonstrations, and which subvert the truth of
all experience: as James Peletier told me in mine owne house, that he
had found out two lines bending their course one towards another, as
if they would meet and joyne together; neverthelesse he affirmed that,
even unto infinity, they could never come to touch one another.  And
the Pyrrhonians use their arguments, and reason but to destroy the
apparance of experience: and it is a wonder to see how far the
supplenesse of our reason hath in this design followed them to resist
the evidence of effects: for they affirme that we move not, that we
speake not, that there is no weight, nor heat, with the same force of
arguing that we averre the most likeliest things.  Ptolomey, who was
an excellent man, had established the bounds of the world; all ancient
philosophers have thought they had a perfect measure thereof, except
it were certaine scattered ilands which might escape their knowledge:
it had beene to Pyrrhonize a thousand yeares agoe, had any man gone
about to make a question of the art of cosmography: and the opinions
that have beene received thereof, of all men in generall: it had beene
flat heresie to avouch that there were Antipodes.  See how in our age
an infinite greatnesse of firme land hath beene discovered, not an
iland onely, nor one particular country, but a part in greatnesse very
neere equall unto that which we knew.  Our moderne geographers cease
not to affirme that now all is found, and all is discovered:

  Nam quod adest praesto, placet, et pollere videtur,/1

  For what is present here,

  Seemes strong, is held most deare.

The question is now, if Ptolomey was heretofore deceived in the
grounds of his reason, whether it were not folly in me to trust what
these late fellowes say of it, and whether it be not more likely that
this huge body which we terme the world is another manner of thing
than we judge it.  Plato saith that it often changeth his countenance,
that the heaven, the starres, and the sunne do sometimes re-enverse
the motion we perceive in them, changing the east into the west.  The
Aegyptian priests told Herodotus that since their first king, which
was eleaven thousand and odde yeares (when they made him see the
pictures of all their former kings, drawne to the life in statues) the
sun course had changed his course foure times: that the sea and the
earth doe enterchangeably change one into another; that the worlds
birth is undetermined: the like said Aristotle and Cicero.  And some
one amongst us averreth that it is altogether eternall, mortal, and
new reviving againe, by many vicissitudes, calling Solomon and Esay to
witnesse: to avoid these oppositions, that God hath sometimes been a
Creator without a creature; that he hath beene idle; that he hath
unsaid his idlenesse by setting his hand to this

----- 1 LUCR. 1. v. 1422.

worke, and that by consequence he is subject unto change.  In the most
famous schooles of Greece, the world is reputed a God framed by
another greater and mightier God, and is composed of a body and a
soule, which abideth in his centre, spreading it selfe by musicall
numbers unto his circumference, divine, thrice happy, very great, most
wise and eternall. In it are other Gods, as the sea, the earth, and
planets, which with an harmonious celestiall dance; sometime meeting,
other times farre-sundering themselves; now hiding, them shewing
themselves; and changing place, now forward, now backward.  Heraclitus
firmly mainitained that the world was composed of fire, and by the
destinies order it should one day burst forth into flames, and be so
consumed into cinders, and another day it should be new borne againe.
And Apuleius of men saith: Sigillatim mortales; cunctim perpetui:/1
'Severally mortall; altogether everlasting.'  Alexander writ unto his
mother the narration of an AEgyptian priest, drawne from out their
monuments, witnessing the antiquitie of that nation, infinite; and
comprehending the birth and progresse of their countries to the
life. Cicero and Diodorus said in their daies that the Chaldeans kept
a register of foure hundred thousand and odde yeares; Aristotle,
Plinie, and others, that Zoroaster lived sixe thousand yeares before
Plato.  And Plato saith that those of the citty of Sais have memories
in writing of eight thousand yeares, and that the towne of Athens was
built a thousand yeares before the citty of Sais.  Epicurus, that at
one same time all things that are looke how we see them, they are all
alike, and in the same fashion, in divers other Worlds, which he would
have spoken more confidently had he seene the similitudes and
correspondencies of this new-found world of the West Indiaes with
ours, both present and past, by so many strange examples. Truly, when
I consider what hath followed our learning by the course of this

----- 1 L.  APUL.  De Deo; SOCRAT.

terrestriall policies I have divers times wondered at my selfe, to see
in so great a distance of times and places, the simpathy or jumping of
so great a number of popular and wilde opinions, and of extravagant
customes and beliefes, and which by no meanes seeme to hold with our
naturall discourse. Man's spirit is a wonderfull worker of miracles.
But this relation hath yet a kind of I wot not what more Heteroclite:
which is found both in names and a thousand other things.  For there
were found Nations which (as far as we know) bad never heard of us,
where circumcision was held in request; where great states and
commonwealths were maintained onely by women, and no men: where our
fasts and Lent was represented, adding thereunto the abstinence from
women; where our crosses were severall waies in great esteeme. In some
places they adorned and honored their sepulchres with them, and
elsewhere especially that of Saint Andrew, they employed to shield
themselves from nightly visions, and to lay them upon childrens
couches, as good against enchantments and witchcrafts.  In another
place they found one made of wood, of an exceeding height, worshipped
for the God of raine; which was thrust very deepe into the ground.
There was found a very expresse and lively image of our
Penitentiaries: the use of Miters, the Priestes single life; the Art
of Divination by the entrailes of sacrificed beasts; the abstinence
from all sorts of flesh and fish for their food; the order amongst
Priests, in saying of their divine service, to use a not vulgar but a
particular tongue; and this erroneous and fond conceipt, that the
first God was expelled his throne by a younger brother of his: that
they were at first created with all commodities, which afterward, by
reason of their sinnes, were abridged them: that their territory hath
beene changed; that their naturall condition hath beene much impaired:
that they have heretofore beene drowned by the inundation of Waters
come from heaven; that none were saved but a few families, which cast
themselves into the cracks or hollows of high Mountaines, which
crackes they stoped very close, so that the Waters could not enter in,
having before shut therin many kinds of beasts: that when they
perceived the Raine to cease and Waters to fall, the first sent out
certaine doggs, which returned cleane-washt and wet, they judged that
the waters were not yet much falne; and that afterward sending out
some other, which seeing to returne all muddy and foule, they issued
forth of the mountaines, to repeople the world againe, which they
found replenished onely with Serpents.  There were places found where
they used the perswasion of the day of judgement, so that they grew
wondrous wroth and offended with the Spaniards, who in digging and
searching of riches in their graves, scattered here and there the
bones of there deceased friends, saying that those dispersed bones
could very hardly be reconjoyned againe.  They also found where they
used traffic by exchange, and no otherwise; and had Faires and Markets
for that purpose; they found dwarfes, and such other deformed
creatures, used for the ornament of Princes tables: they found the use
of hawking and fowling according to the nature of their birdes:
tyrannical subsidies, and grievances upon subjects; delicate and
pleasant gardens; dancing, tumbling, leaping, and lugling, musicke of
instruments, armories, dicing-houses, tennisse-courts, and casting
lottes, or mumne-chaunce, wherein they are often so earnest and moody,
that they will play themselves and their liberty: using no other
physicke but by charmes: the manner of writing by figures: beleeving
in one first man, universall father of all people. The adoration of
one God, who heretofore lived man in perfect Virginitie, fasting, and
penance, preaching the law of Nature, and the ceremonies of religion;
and who vanished out of the world without any naturall death: The
opinion of Giants; the use of drunkennesse, with their manner of
drinkes and drinking and pledging of, healths; religious ornaments
painted over with bones and dead mens sculs; surplices, holy Water,
and holy Water sprinckles, Women and servants which thrivingly presnt
themselves to be burned or enterred with their deceased husbands or
masters: a law that the eldest or first borne child shall succeed and
inherit all: where nothing at all is reserved for Punies, but
obedience: a custome to the promotion of certaine officers of great
authority, and where he that is promoted takes upon him a new name,
and quiteth his owne: Where they used to cast lime upon the knees of
new borne children, saying unto him: From dust then camest, and to
dust then shalt returne againe: the Arts of Augures or
prediction. These vaine shadowes of our religion, which are seene in
some of these examples, witnesse the dignity and divinity thereof.  It
hath not onely in some sort insinuated it selfe among all infidell
Nations on this side by some imitations, but amongst those barbarous
Nations beyond, as it were by a common and supernaturall inspiration:
For amongst them was also found the beliefe of Purgatory, but after a
new forme: for, what we ascribe unto fire, they impute unto cold, and
imagine that soules are both purged and punished by the vigor of an
extreame coldnesse.  This example putteth me in mind of another
pleasant diversity: For, as there were some people found who tooke
pleasure to unhood the end of their yard, and to cut off the
fore-skinne after the manner of the Mahometans and Jewes, some there
were found that made so great a conscience to unhood it, that with
little strings they caried their fore-skin very carefully out-streched
and fastened above, for feare that end should see the aire.  And of
this other diversity also, that as we honour our Kings and celebrate
our Holy-daies with decking and trimming our selves with the best
habilliments we have; in some regions there, to shew all disparity and
submission to their King, their subjects present themselves unto him
in their basest and meanest apparrell; and entring unto his pallace
they take some old torne garment and put it over their other attire,
to the end all the glory and ornament may shine in their Soveraigne
and Maister.

But let us goe on: if Nature enclose within the limits of her ordinary
progresse, as all other things, so the beliefes, the judgments and the
opinions of men; if they have their revolutions, their seasons, their
birth, and their death, even as cabbages: if heaven doth move, agitate
and rowle them at his pleasure, what powerfull and permanent authority
doe we ascribe unto them?  If by uncontroled experience we palpably
touch, that the forme of our being depends of the aire, of the
climate, and of the soile wherein we are borne and not onely the hew,
the stature, the complexion and the countenance, but also the soules
facilities: Et plagae coeli non serum ad robor corporum, sed etiam
animorum facit: 'The climate helpeth not onely for strength of body,
but of minds,' saith Vegetius: And that the Goddesse, foundresse of
the Citie of Athens, chose a temperature of a country to situate it
in, that might make the men wise, as the AEgyptian Priests taught
Solon: Athenis tenue eoclum: ex quo etiam acutiores putantur Attici:
crassum Thebis: itague pingues Thebani, et valentes:/1 'About Athens
is a thin aire, whereby those Country-men are esteemed the sharper
witted: about Thebes the aire is grosse, and therefore the Thebans
were grosse and strong of constitution.'  In such manner that as
fruits and beasts doe spring up diverse and different; so men are
borne either more or lesse warlike, martiall, just, temperate, and
docile: here subject to wine, there to theft and whoredome: here
inclined to superstition, addicted to misbehaving; here given to
liberty; there to servitude; capable of some one art or science;
grosse-witted or ingenious: either obedient or rebellious; good or
bad, according as the inclination of the place beareth, where they are
seated; and being removed from one soile to another (as plants are)
they take a new complexion: which was the cause that Cirus would never
permit the Persians to leave their barren, rough, and craggie Country,
for to transport themselves into another, more gentle, more fertile,
and

----- 1 CIC.  De Fato.

more plaine: saying, that 'fat and delicious countries make men wanton
and effeminate+; and fertile soiles yeeld infertile spirits.  If
sometime wee see one art to flourish, or a beliefe, and sometimes
another, by some heavenly influence: some ages to produce this or that
nature, and so to encline mankind to this or that base: mens spirits
one while flourishing, another while barren, even as fields are seene
to be; what become of all those goodly prerogatives wherewith we still
flatter ourselves.  Since a wise man may mistake himselfe; yea, many
men, and whole nations; and as wee say, mans nature either in one
thing or other, hath for many ages together mistaken her selfe.  What
assurance have we that at any time she leaveth her mistaking, and that
she continueth not even at this day, in her error? Me thinkes amongst
other testimonies of our imbecilities, this one ought not to be
forgotten, that by wishing it selfe, man cannot yet finde out what he
wanteth; that not by enjoying or possession, but by imagination and
full wishing, we cannot all agree in one that we most stand in need
of, and would best content us.  Let our imagination have free liberty
to cut out and sew at her pleasure, she cannot so much as desire what
is fittest to please and content her.

  -----quid enim ratione timemus

  Aut cupimus? quid tam dextro pede concipis, ut te


  Conatus non paeniteat, votique peracti?/1

  By reason what doe we feare, or desire?

  With such dexteritie what doest aspire,

  But thou eftsoones repentest it,

  Though thy attempt and vow doe hit?

That is the reason why Socrates never requested the gods to give him
anything but what they knew to be good for him.  And the publike and
private prayer of the Lacedemonians did meerely implie that good and
faire things might be granted them, remitting the election and choise
of them to the discretion of the highest power.

----- 1 JUV.  Sat. x. 4.

  Coniugium petimus partumque uxoris, at illis

  Notum qui pueri, qualisque futura sit uxor./1

  We wish a wife, wifes breeding: we would know,

  What children; shall our wife be sheep or shrow.

And the Christian beseecheth God, that his will may be done, least he
should fall into that inconvenience which poets faine of King Midas,
who requested of the Gods that whatsoever he toucht might be converted
into gold: his praiers were heard, his wine was gold, his bread gold,
the feathers of his bed, his shirt, and his garments were turned into
gold, so that he found himselfe overwhelmed in the injoying of his
desire, and being enricht with an intolerable commoditie, he must now
unpray his prayers:

  Attonitus novitate mali, divesque miserque,

  Effugere optat opes, et quae modo voverat, odit/2

  Wretched and rich, amaz'd at so strange ill,

  His riches he would flie, hates his owns will.

Let me speake of my selfe; being very yong I besought fortune above
all ibings that she would make me a knight of the order of Saint
Michael, which in those daies was very rare, and the highest tipe of
honour the French nobilitie aymed at; she very kindly granted my
request; I had it.  In lieu of raising and advancing me from my place
for the attaining of it, she hath much more graciously entreated me,
she hath debased and depressed it, even unto my shoulders and under.
Cleobis and Biton, Trophonius and Agamedes, the two first having
besought the Goddesse, the two latter their God, of some recompence
worthy their pietie, received death for a reward. So much are heavenly
opinions different from ours, concerning what we have need of.  God
might grant us riches, honours, long life and health, but many times
to our owne hurt.  For, whatsoever is pleasing to us, is not alwaies
healthfull for us.  If in lieu of former health he send us death, or
some worse sicknesse: Virga tua et baculus 1 JUV.  Sat. x. 352. 2
OVID. Met. 1. xi. 128.  tuus ipsa me consolata sunt:/1 'Thy rod and
thy staffe hath comforted me.' He doth it by the reasons of his
providence, which more certainly considereth and regardeth what is
meet for us then we ourselves can doe, and we ought to take it in good
part as from a most wise and thrice-friendly hand.

  ----- si consilium vis,

  Permittes ipsis expendere numinibus, quid


  Conveniat nobis, rebusque sit vtile nostris:

  Charior est illis homo quam sibi.2/

  If you will counsell have, give the Gods leave

  To weigh what is most meet we should receive,

  And what for our estate most profit were:

  To them, then to himselfe man is more deare.

For, to crave honours and charges of them, is to request them to cast
you in some battle, or play at hazard, or some such thing, whereof the
event is unknowen to you, and the fruit uncertaine.  There is no
combate amongst philosophers so violent and sharpe as that which
ariseth upon the question of mans chiefe felicitie, from which
(according to Varroe's calculation) arose two hundred and foure score
Sects.  Qui autem de summo hono dissentit, de tota Philosophiae
ratione disputat: 'But he that disagrees about the chiefest felicitie,
cals in question the whole course of Philosophie.

  Tres mihi convivae prope dissentire videntur,

  Poscentes vario multit diversa palato.

  Ouid dem? quid non dem? renuis tu quod iubet alter:

  Quod petis, id sane est invisum acidumque duobus./3

  Three guests of mine doe seeme allmost at ods to fall,

  Whilest they with divers taste for divers things doe call:

  What should I give?  What not?  You will not, what he will;

  What you would, to them twaine is hatefull, sowre and ill.

Nature should thus answer their contestations and debates.  Some say
our felicitie consisteth and is in vertue, others in voluptuousnesse,
others in yeelding unto Nature, some others in learning, others in
feeling no manner of paine or sorrow, others for a man never

----- 1 Psalm. xxiii. 4. 2 JUV.  Sat x. 346. 3 HOR. 1. ii.
Epist. ii. 61.

  to suffer himselfe to be carried away by appearances, and to this
  opinion seemeth this other of ancient Pithagoras to incline,


  Nil_admirari+, propre res est una,

  Numici, Solaque, quae possit facere et servare beatum,

  Sir, nothing to admire, is th' only thing,

  That may keepe happy, and to happy bring,

which is the end and scope of the Pyrrhonian Sect.  Aristotle
ascribeth unto magnanimitie+, to admire and wonder at nothing.  And
Archesilaus said that sufference and an upright and inflexible state
of judgement were true felicities; whereas consents and applications
were vices and evils.  True it is, that where he establisheth it for a
certaine Axiome, he started from Pyrrhonisme.  When the Pyrrhonians
say that ataraxy is the chiefe felicitie, which is the immobilitie of
judgement, their meaning is not to speake it affirmatively, but the
very wavering of their mind, which makes them to shun downefalls, and
to shrewd themselves under the shelter of calmenesse, presents this
phantasie unto them, and makes them refuse another.  Oh how much doe I
desire that whilest I live, either some other learned men, or Iustus
Lipsius+, the most sufficient and learned man now living; of a most
polished and judicious wit, true Cosingermane to my Turnebus, had both
will, health, and leisure enough, sincerely and exactly, according to
their divisions and formes, to collect into one volume or register, as
much as by us might be seene, the opinions of ancient philosophy,
concerning the subject of our being and customes, their controversies
the credit, and partaking of factions and sides, the application of
the authors and sectators lives, to their precepts in memorable and
exemplarie accidents.  O what a worthy and profitable labour would it
be!  Besides, if it be from our selves that we draw the regiment of
our customes, into what a bottomles confusion doe we cast our selves?
For what our reason perswades us to be most likely for it, is

----- 1 HOR. 1. i.  Epist. vi. 1.

generally for every man to obey the lawes of his country, as is the
advise of Socrates, inspired (saith be) by a divine perswasion.  And
what else meaneth she thereby, but only that our devoire or duety hath
no other rule but casuall?  Truth ought to have a like and universall
visage throughout the world.  Law and justice, if man knew any, that
had a body and true essence, he would not fasten it to the condition
of this or that countries customes. It is not according to the
Persians or Indians fantazie that vertue should take her forme.
Nothing is more subject unto a continuall agitation then the laws.  I
have, since I was borne, seene those of our neighbours, the English-
men, changed and re-changed three or foure times, not only in politike
subjects, which is that some will dispense of constancy, but in the
most important subject that possibly can be, that is to say, in
religion: whereof I am so much the more ashamed, because it is a
nation with which my countriemen have heretofore had so inward and
familiar acquaintance, that even to this day there remain in my house
some ancient monuments of our former alliance.  Nay, I have seene
amongst our selves some things become lawfull which erst were deemed
capitall: and we that hold some others, are likewise in possibilitie,
according to the uncertainty of warring fortune+, one day or other, to
be offenders against the Majestie both of God and man, if our justice
chance to fall under the mercy of justice; and in the space of few
yeares possession, taking a contrary essence.  How could that ancient
God more evidently accuse, in humane knowledge, the ignorance of
divine essence, and teach men that their religion was but a peece of
their owne invention, fit to combine their societies then in
declaring, as he did, to those which sought the instruction of it, by
his sacred Tripos, that the true worshipping of God was that which he
found to be observed by the custome of the place where he lived?  Oh
God, what bond or dutie is it that we owe not to our Soveragne
Creators benignitie, in that he hath beene pleased to cleare and
enfranchise our beliefe from those vagabonding and arbitrary
devotions, and fixt it upon the eternall base of his holy word?  What
will Philosophie then say to us in this necessity? that we follow the
lawes of our country, that is to say, this waveing sea of a peoples or
of a Princes opinions, which shall paint me forth justice with as many
c6oours, and reforme the same into as many visages as there are
changes and alterations of passions in them.  I cannot have my
judgement so flexible.  What goodnesse is that which but yesterday I
saw in credit and esteeme, and to morrow to have lost all reputation,
and that the crossing of a river is made a crime?  What truth is that
which these Mountaines bound, and is a lie in the world beyond them?
But they are pleasant, when to allow the lawes some certaintie, they
say that there be some firme, perpetuall and immoveable; which they
call naturall, and by the condition of their proper essence, are
imprinted in mankind: of which some make three in number, some foure,
some more, some lesse: an evident token that it is a marke as
doubtfull as the rest.  Now are they so unfortunate (for how can I
terme that but misfortune, that of so infinit a number of lawes there
is not so much as one to be found which the fortune or temeritie of
chance hath graunted to be universally received, and by the consent of
unanimitie of all Nations to be admitted?) they are (I say) so
miserable that of these three or four choice-selected lawes there is
not one alone that is not impugned or disallowed, not by one nation,
but by many.  Now is the generalitie of approbation the onely likely
ensigne by which they may argue some lawes to be naturall; for what
nature had indeed ordained us, that should we doubtlesse follow with
one common consent; and not one onely nation, but every man in
particular should have a feeling of the force and violece which he
should urge him with, that would incite him to contrarie and resist
that law.  Let them all (for example sake) shew me but one of this
condition. Protagoras and Ariston gave the justice of the lawes no
other essence, but the authority and opinion of the law giver, and
that excepted, both good and honest lost their qualities, and remained
but vaine and idle names of indifferent things.  Thrasymachus, in
Plato, thinkes there is no other right but the commoditie of the
superior.  There is nothing wherein the world differeth so much as in
customes and lawes.  Some things are here accompted abominable, which
in another place are esteemed commendable; as in Lacedemonia, the
slight and subtlety in stealing marriages in proximity of blood are
amongst us forbidden as capitall, elsewhere they are allowed and
esteemed

  -----gentes esse feruntur,

  In quibus et nato genitrix, et nata parenti

  Iungitur, et pietas geminato crescit amore./1

There are some people where the another weddeth Her sonne the daughter
her owne father beddeth, And so by doubling love, their kinduesse
spreddeth.  The murthering of children and of parents; the
communication with women; traffic of jobbing and stealing; free
licence to all manner of sensuality; to conclude, there is nothing so
extreme and horrible, but is found to be received and allowed by the
custome of some nation.  It is credible that there be naturall lawes,
as may be seene in other creatures, but in us they are lost: this
goodly humane reason engrafting it self among all men, to sway and
command, confounding and topsi-turving the visage of all things
according to her inconstant vanitie and vaine inconstancy.  Nihil
itaque amplius nostrum est, quod nostrum dico, artis est: 'Therefore
nothing more is ours: all that I call ours belongs to art.  Subjects
have divers lustres, and severall considerations, whence the diversity
of opinion is chiefly engendred.  One nation vieweth a subject with
one visage, and thereon it staies; an other with an other.  Nothing
can be imagined so horrible as for one to eate and devour his owne
father.  Those people which anciently kept this custome hold it
neverthelesse for a testimonie of pietie and good affection: seeking
by

----- 1 OVID.  Metam. 1. x. 331.

that meane to give their fathers the worthiest and most honourable
sepulchre, harboring their fathers bodies and reliques in themselves,
and in their marrow; in some sort reviving and regenerating them by
the transmutation made in their quicke flesh by digestion and
nourishment.  It is easie to be considered what abomination and
cruelty it had beene, in men accustomed and trained in this inhumane
superstition, to cast the carcases of their parents into the
corruption of the earth, as food for beasts and wormes. Lycurgus
wisely considereth in theft, the vivacitie, dilignce, courage, and
nimblenesse that is required in surprising or taking any thing from
ones neighbour, and the commoditie which thereby redoundeth to the
common- wealth, that every man heedeth more curiously the keeping of
that which is his owne, and judged that by this twofold institution to
assaile and to defend, much good was drawne for military discipline
(which was the principall Science and chiefe verue wherein he would
enable that nation) of greater respect and more consideration than was
the disorder and injustice of prevailing and taking other mens goods.
Dionysius, the tyrant offered Plato a robe made after the Persian
fashion, long, damask, and perfumed: but he refused the same, saying,
'That being borne a man, he would not willingly put on a womans
garment.  But Aristippus tooke it, with this answer, 'That no garment
could corrupt a chaste mind.  His friends reproved his demissenesse in
being so little offended, that Dionysius had spitten in his face. 'Tut
(said be) fishers suffer themselves to be washed over head and eares
to get a gudgion.  Diogenes washing of coleworts for his dinner,
seeing him passe by, said unto him, 'If thou couldest live with
coleworts, thou wouldest not court and fawne upon a tyrant;' to whom
Aristippus replied, 'If thou couldest live among men, thou wouldest
not wash coleworts.  See here how reason yeeldeth apparance to divers
effects.  It is a pitcher with two eares, which a man may take hold
on, either by the right or left hand.

  ----- bellunt o terra hospita portas,

  Bello armantur equi, bellum haec armenta minantur: Sed tamen iidem
  olim curru succedere sueti


  Quadrupedes, et froena jugo concordia ferre,

  Spes est pacis./1

  O stranger-harbring land, thou bringst us warre;

  Steeds serve for war;

  These heards doe threaten jarre.

  Yet horses erst were wont to draw our waines,

  And harnest matches beare agreeing raines,

  Hope is hereby that wee

  In peace shall well agree.

Solon being importuned not to shed vaine and bootles teares for the
death of his sonne; 'Thats the reason (answered hee) I may more justly
shed them, because they are bootlesse and vaine.  Socrates, his wife,
exasperated her griefe by this circumstance. 'Good Lord (said she) how
unjustly doe these bad judges put him to death. ' What! wouldest thou
rather they should execute me justly? replied he to her.  It is a
fashion amongst us to have holes bored in our eares: the Greekes held
it for a badge of bondage.  We hide our selves when we will enjoy our
wives: the Indians doe it in open view of all men.  The Scithians were
wont to sacrifice strangers in their Temples, whereas in other places
Churches are Sanctuaries for them

  Inde furor vulgi, quodnumina vicinorum

  Odit quisque locus, cum solos credat habendos

  Esse Deos quos ipse colit./2

  The vulgar hereupon doth rage, because

  Each place doth hate their neighbours soveraigne lawes,

  And onely Gods doth deeme,

  Those Gods, themselves esteeme.

I have heard it reported of a Judge who, when he met with any sharp
conflict betweene Bartolus and Baldus, or with any case admitting
contrarieties was wont to write in the margin of his book, 'A question
for a friend,' which is to say, that the truth was so entangled and
disputable that in such a case he might

----- 1 VIRG.  AEn. 1. iii. 559. 2 JUV.  Sat. xv. 36.

favour which party he should thinke good.  There was no want but of
spirit and sufficiency, if he set not every where through his books,
'A question for a friend.  The Advocates and Judges of our time find
in all cases byases too-too-many to fit them where they think good.
To so infinite a science, depending on the authority of so many
opinions, and of so arbitrary a subject, it cannot be but that an
exceeding confusion of judgements must arise. There are very few
processes so cleare but the Lawiers advises upon them will be found to
differ: What one company hath judged another will adjudge the
contrary, and the very same will another time change opinion.  Whereof
we see ordinarie examples by this licence which wonderfully blemisheth
the authoritie and lustre of our law, never to stay upon one sentence,
but to run from one to another judge, to decide one same case.
Touching the libertie of Philosophicall opinions concerning vice and
vertue, it is a thing needing no great extension, and wherein are
found many advises which were better unspoken then published to weake
capacities.  Arcesilaus was wont to say that in pailliardize it was
not worthy consideration, where, on what side, and how it was done.
Et obcaenas voluptates, si natura requirit, non genera, aut loco, aut
ordine, sed forma, aetate, figura metiendas Epicurus putat.  Ne amores
quidem sanctos a sapiente atienos esse arbitrantur.  Quaeramus ad quam
usque, aetatem iuvenes amandi sint: 'Obscene pleasures, if nature
require them, the Epicure esteemeth not to be measured by kind, place,
or order: but by forme, age, and fashion.  Nor doth he thinke that
holy loves should be strange from a wise man.  Let us then question to
what years yong folke may be beloved.  These two last Stoicke places,
and upon this purpose, the reproch of Diogarchus to Plato himselfe,
shew how many excessive licences and out of common use soundest
Philosophy doth tolerate.  Lawes take their authoritie from possession
and custome.  It is dangerous to reduce them to their beginning: In
rowling on they swell and grow greater and greater, as doe our rivers:
follow them upward into their source, and you shall find them but a
bubble of water, scarce to be discerned, which in gliding on swelleth
so proud and gathers so much strength.  Behold the ancient
considerations which have given the first motion to this famous
torrent, so full of dignitie, of honour and reverence, you shall finde
them so light and weake that these men which will weigh all and
complaine of reason, and who receive nothing upon trust and
authoritie, it is no wonder if their judgments are often far distant
from common judgement.  Men that take Natures first image for a
patterne it is no marvaile if in most of their opinions they miss the
common- beaten path.  As for example few amongst them would have
approved the false conditions of our marriages, and most of them would
have had women in community and without any private respect.  They
refused our ceremonies: Chrysippus said that some Philosophers would
in open view of all men shew a dozen of tumbling-tricks, yea, without
any slops or breeches, for a dozen of olives.  He would hardly have
perswaded Calisthenes to refuse his faire daughter Agarista to
Hippoclides, because he had seen him graft the forked tree in her upon
a table.  Metrocles somewhat indiscreetly, as he was disputing in his
Schole, in presence of his auditory, let a fart, for shame whereof he
afterwards kept his house and could not be drawen abroad untill such
time as Crates went to visit him, who to his perswasions and reasons,
adding the example of his liberty, began to fart a vie with him and to
remove this scruple from off his conscience; and moreover won him to
his Stoicall (the more free) Sect, from the Peripateticall (and more
civill) one, which the-therunto he had followed.  That which we call
civilitie not to dare to doe that openly, which amongst us is both
awfull and honest, being done in secret, they termed folly: And to
play the wilie Foxe in concealing and disclaiming what nature,
custome, and our desire publish and proclaims of our actions, they
deemed to be a vice.  And thought it a suppressing of Venus her
mysteries to remove them from out the private vestry of her temple,
and expose them to the open view of the people.  And that to draw her
sports from out the curtaines was to loose them.  Shame is matter of
some consequence.  Concealing, reservation and circumspection are
parts of estimation.  That sensuality under the maske of Vertu did
very ingeniously procure not to be prostituted in the midst of
highwaies, not trodden upon and seen by the common sort, alledging the
dignity and commodity of her wonted Cabinets.  Whereupon some say that
to forbid and remove the common brothel-houses is not only to spread
whoredome every where, which only was allotted to those places, but
also to incite idle and vagabond men to that vice by reason of the
difficultie.

  Maechus es Aufidiae qui vir Corvine fuisti,

  Rivalis fuerat qui tuus, ille vir est.

  Cur aliena placet tibi, qua, tua non placet uxor?

  Nunquid securas non potes arrigere?/1

This experience is diversified by a thousand examples.

  Nullus in vrbe fuit tota, qui tangere vellet

  Uxorem gratis Caeciliane tuam,

  Dum licuit: sed nunc positis custodibus, inqens

  Turba fututorum est, ingeniosus homo es:./2


A Philosopher being taken with the deed, was demaunded what he did,
answered very mildly, 'I plant man,' blushing no more being found so
napping than if he had beene taken setting of Garlike.  It is (as I
suppose) of a tender and respective opinion that a notable and
religious Author holds this action so necessarily-bound to secrecy and
shame, that in Cynike embracements and dalliances he coulidnot be
perswaded that the worke should come to her end; but rather that it
lingred and staid only to represent wanton gestures and lascivious
motions, to maintaine the impudency of their schooles profession: and
that to powre forth what shame had forced and bashfullnesse

---- - 1 MART. 1. iii.  Epig. lxx. 2 Ib. 1. i.  Epig. lxxiv.

restrained, they had also afterward need to seeke some secret
place. He had not seene far enough into their licenciousnesse: for
Diogenes in sight of all, exercising his Masturbation, bred a longing
desire in the bystanders, that in such sort they might fill their
bellies by rubbing or clawing the same.  To those that asked him why
he sought for no fitter place to feed in than in the open frequented
highway he made answer, 'It is because I am hungry in the open
frequented high-way.  The Philosophers Women, which medled with their
Sects, did likewise in all places and without any discretion medle
with their bodies: And Crates had never received Hipparchia into his
fellowship but upon condition io follow all the customes and fashions
of his order.  These Philosophers set an extreme rate on vertue and
rejected al other disciplins except the mortall; hence it is that in
all actions they ascribed the Soveraigne authority to the election of
their wise, yea, and above all lawes: and appointed no other restraint
unto voluptuousness, but the moderation and preservation of others
liberty.  Heraclitus and Protagoras, forsomuch as wine seemeth bitter
unto the sicke and pleasing to the healthy; and an oare crooked in the
water and straight to them that see it above water, and such-like
contrary apparances which are found in some subjects; argued that all
subjects had the causes of these apparances in them, and that there
was some kind of bitternes in the wine which had a reference unto the
sick mans taste; in the oare a certain crooked qualitie, having
relation to him that seeth it in the water.  And so of all things
else. Which implieth, that all is in all things, and by consequence
nothing in any: for either nothing is, or all is.  This opinion put me
in mind of the experience we have, that there is not any one sense or
visage, either straight or crooked, bitter or sweet, but mans wit
shall find in the writings which he undertaketh to runne over.  In the
purest, most unspotted, and most absolutely perfect word that possibly
can be, how many errors, falshoods and lies have beene made to proceed
from it?  What heresie hath not found testimonies and ground
sufficient, both to undertake and to maintaine itself?  It is,
therefore, that the Authors of such errors will never goe from this
proofe of the testimony of words interpretation.  A man of worth going
about by authority to approve the search of the Philosophers stone
(wherein he was overwhelmed) alleadged at least five or six several
passages out of the holy bible unto me, upon which (he said) he had at
first gounded himselfe for the discharge of his conscience (for he is
a man of Ecclesiastical profession), and truly the invention of them
was not only pleasant, but also very fitly applied to the defence of
this goodly and mind-enchanting science.  This way is the credit of
divining fables attained to.  There is no prognosticator if he have
but this authority that any one wil but vouchsafe to read him over,
and curiously to search all the infoldings and lustres of his words,
but a man shall make him say what he pleaseth, as the Sibils. There
are so many means of interpretation that it is hard, be it flat-long,
side-long, or edge-long, but an ingenious and pregnant wit shal in all
subjects meet with some aire that wil fit his turn.  Therefore is a
clowdy, darke and ambiguous stile found in so frequent and ancient
custome, that the Author may gaine to draw, allure, and busie
posterity to himselfe, which not only the sufficiency but the casuall
favour of the matter may gaine as much or more.  As for other matters
let him, be it either through foolishnes or subtilty, shew himself
somewhat obscure and divers, it is no matter, care not he for that.  A
number of spirits sifting and tossing him over will finde and express
sundry formes, either accordinfg, or collaterally, or contrary to his
owne, all which shall do him credit.  He shal see himselfe enriched by
the meanes of his Disciples, as the Grammer Schools Maisters. It is
that which hath made many things of nothing, to pass very currant,
that hath brought divers books in credit, and charged with all sorts
of matter that any hath but desired: one selfsame thing admitting a
thousand and a thousand, and as many severall images and divers
considerations, as it best pleaseth us.  Is it possible that ever
Homer meant all that which some make him to have meant?  And that he
prostrated hiniselfe to so many, and so severall shapes, as, Divines,
Lawiers, Captaines, Philosophers, and all sort of people else, which,
how diversely and contrary soever it be they treat of sciences, do
notwithstanding wholy rely, upon him, and refer themselves unto him as
a Generall Maister for all offices, workes, sciences, and tradesmen,
and an universall counsellor in all enterprises; whosoever hath had
need of Oracles or Predictions, and would apply them to himselfe, hath
found them in him for his purpose.  A notable man, and a good friend
of mine, would make one marvel to beare what strange far-fetcht
conceits and admirable affinities, in favor of our religion, he maketh
to derive from him; and can hardly be drawne from this opinion, but
that such was Homers intent and meaning (yet is Homer so familiar unto
him, as I thinke no man of our age is better acquainted with him).
And what he finds in favour of our religion, many ancient learned men
have found in favour of theirs.  See how Plato is tossed and turned
over, every man endevoring to apply him to his purpose, giveth him
what construction he list.  He is wrested and inserted to all
newfangled opinions that the world receiveth or alloweth of, and
according to the different course of subjects is made to be repugnant
unto himselfe.  Every one according to his sense makes him to disavow
the customes that were lawfull in his daies, inasmuch as they are
unlawfull in these times.  All which is very lively and strongly
maintained, according as the wit and learning of the interpreter is
strong and quicke.  Upon the ground which Heraclitus had, and that
sentence of his, that all things had those shapes in them which men
found in them. And Democritus out of the very same drew a cleane
contrarie conclusion, id est, that subjects had nothing at all in them
of that which we found in them.  And forasmuch as honny was sweet to
one man and bitter to another, he argued that honny was neither sweet
nor bitter.  The Pyrrhonians would say they know not whether it be
sweet or bitter, or both or neither: for, they ever gain the highest
point of doubting.  The Cyrenaicks held that nothing was perceptible
outwardly, and only that was perceivable which by the inward touch or
feeling touched or concerned us, as griefe and sensuality,
distinguishing neither tune nor collours, but onely certaine
affections that came to us of them; and that man had no other seate of
his judgment. Protagoras deemed that to be true to all men, which to
all men seemeth so.  The Epicurians place all judgment in the senses,
and in the notice of things, and in voluptuousnesse.  Platoes mind
was, that the judgment of truth, and truth it selfe drawne from
opinions and senses, belonged to the spirit and to cogitation.  This
discourse hath drawne me to the consideration of the senses, wherein
consisteth the greatest foundation and triall of our ignorance.
Whatsoever is knowne, is without peradventure knowne by the faculty of
the knower: for, since the judgment commeth from the operation of him
that judgeth, reason requireth that he performe and act this operation
by his meanes and will, and not by others compulsion: as it would
follow if wee knew things by the force, and according to the law of
their essence. Now all knowledge is addressed unto us by the senses:
they are our maisters:

  -----via qua munita fidei

  Proxima fert humanum in pectus, templaque mentis./1


  Whereby a way for credit leads well-linde

  Into man's breast and temple of his minde.

Science begins by them and in them is resolved.  After all, we should
know no more then a stone, unlesse we know that here is sound, smell,
light, savor, measure, weight, softnesse, hardnesse, sharpnesse,
colour, smoothnesse, breadth and depth.  Behold here the platforme of
all the frame and principles of the building of all our knowledge.
And according to some, science is nothing 1 LUCR. 1. v. 102.  else but
what is knowne by the senses.  Whosoever can force me to contradict my
senses, hath me fast by the throate, and cannot make me recoyle one
foote backward.  The senses are the beginning and end of humane
knowledge.

  Invenies primis ab sensibus esse creatam

  Notitiam veri, neque sensus posse refelli.

  Quid maiore fide porro, guam sensus, haberi

  Debet/1

  You shall finde knowledge of the truth at first was bred

  From our first senses, nor can senses be misseled.  What, then our
  senses, should

  With us more credit hold?

Attribute as little as may be unto them, yet must this ever be
graunted them, that all our instruction is addressed by their meanes
and intermission.  Cicero saith that Chrysippus having assaid to abate
the power of his senses, and of their vertue, presented contrary
arguments unto himselfe, and so vehement oppositions, that he could
not satisfie himselfe.  Whereupon Carneades (who defended the contrary
part boasted that he used the very same weapons and words of
Chrysippus to combate against him and therefore cried out upon him,
'Oh miserable man! thine owne strength hath foiled thee.  There is no
greater absurditie in our judgment, then to maintaine that fire
heateth not, that light shineth not, that in iron there is neither
weight nor firmenesse, which are notices our senses bring unto us: Nor
beliefe or science in man, that may be compared unto that, in
certaintie.  The first consideration I have upon the senses subject
is, that I make a question, whether man be provided of all naturall
senses, or no.  I see divers creatures that live an entire and perfect
life, some without sight, and some without hearing; who knoweth
whether we also want either one, two, three, or many senses more: For,
if we want any one, our discourse cannot discover the want or defect
thereof.  It is the senses priviledge to be the

----- 1 LUCR. 1. iv. 480, 484.

extreme bounds of our perceiving.  There is nothing beyond them that
may stead us to discover them: No one sense can discover another.

  An poterunt oculos aures reprehendere, an aures

  Tactus, an hunc porro tactum sapor arguet oris,

  An confutabunt nares, oculive revincent?/1

  Can eares the eyes, or can touch reprehend

  The cares, or shall mouthes taste that touch amend?

  Shall our nose it confute,

  Or eyes gainst it dispute?

  They all make the extreamest line of our facultie.


  -----seorsum cuique potestas

  Divisa est, sua vis cuique est./2


  To teach distinctly might

  Is shar'de, each hath its right.

It is impossible to make a man naturally blind, to conceive that he
seeth not; impossible to make him desire to see, and sorrow his
defect.  Therefore ought we not to take assurance that our mind is
contented and satisfied with those we have, seeing it hath not
wherewith to feel her owne malady, and perceive her imperfection, if
it be in any It is impossible to tell that blind man any thing, either
by discourse, argument, or similitude, that lodgeth any apprehension
of light, colour, or sight in his imagination.  There is nothing more
backward that may push the senses to any evidence.  The blind-borne,
which we perceive desire to se, it is not to understand what they
require; they have learnt of us that something they want, and
something they desire, that is in us, with the effects and
consequences thereof, which they call good: yet wot not they what it
is, nor apprehend they it neere or far.  I have seene a gentleman of a
good house, borne blind, at least blind in such an age that he knowes
not what sight is; he understandeth so little what he wanteth, that as
we doe, he useth words fitting sight, and applieth them after a manner
onely proper and

----- 1 LUCR. 1. iv. 488. 2 Ib. 491.

peculiar to himselfe.  A child being brought before him to whom he was
god-father, taking him in his armes, he said, 'Good Lord, what a fine
child this is! it is a goodly thing to see him.  What a cherefull
countenance he hath! how prettily he looketh!' He will say as one of
us, 'This hall hath a faire prospect.  It is very faire weather, The
Sunne shines cleare. Nay, which is more: because hunting, hawking,
tennis-play, and shuting at buts are our common sports and exercises
(for so he hath heard) his mind will be so affected unto them, and he
wil so busie himselfe about them, that he will thinke to have as great
an interest in them as any of us, and shew himselfe as earnestly
passionate, both in liking and disliking them, as any else; yet doth
be conceive and receive them but by hearing. If he be in a faire
champion ground, where he may ride, they will tell him, yonder is a
Hare started, or the Hare is killed, he is as busily earnest of his
game as he heareth others to be that have perfect sight.  Give him a
ball, he takes it in the left hand, and with the right strikes it away
with his racket; in a piece he shutes at randome; and is well pleased
with what his men tell him, be it high or wide.  Who knowes whether
mankind commit as great a folly, for want of some sense, and that by
this default the greater part of the visage of things be concealed
from us?  Who knowes whether the difficulties we find in sundry of
Natures workes proceede thence?  And whether diverse effects of
beasts, which exceed our capacitie, are produced by the facultie of
some sense that we want?  And whether some of them have by that meane
a fuller and more perfect life then ours?  We seize on an apple wel
nigh with all our senses; we find rednesse, smoothnesse, odor and
sweetnesse in it; besides which, it may have other vertues, either
drying or binding, to which we have no sense to be referred.  The
proprieties which in many things we call secret, as in the Adamant to
draw iron, is it not likely there should be sensitive faculties in
nature able to judge and perceive them, the want whereof breedeth in
us the ignorance of the true essence of such things?  It is happily
some particular sense that unto cockes or chanticleares discovereth
the morning and midnight houre, and moveth them to crow: that teacheth
a hen, before any use or experience, to feare a hawke and not a goose
or a peacocke, farre greater birds: that warneth yong chickins of the
hostile qualitie which the cat hath against them, and not to distrust
a dog; to strut and arme themselves against the mewing of the one (in
some sort a flattering and milde voice) and not against the barking of
the other (a snarling and quarrelous voice): that instructeth rats,
wasps, and emmets, ever to chuse the best cheese and fruit, having
never tasted them before: and that addresseth the stag, the elephant,
and the serpent, to the knowledge of certaine herbs and simples,
which, being either wounded or sicke, have the vertue to cure them.
There is no sense but hath some great domination, and which by his
meane affordeth not an infinite number of knowledges.  If we were to
report the intelligence of sounds, of harmony and of the voice, it
would bring an imaginable confusion to all the rest of our learning
and science.  For, besides what is tyed to the proper effect of every
sense, how many arguments, consequences, and conclusions draw we unto
other things, by comparing one sense to another? Let a skilfull, wise
man but imagine humane nature to be originally produced without sight
and discourse, how much ignorance and trouble such a defect would
bring unto him, and what obscurity and blindnesse in our mind.  By
that shall we perceive how much the privation of one, or two, or three
such senses (if there be any in us) doth import us about the knowledge
of truth.  We have by the consultation and concurrence of our five
senses formed one Verity, whereas peradventure there was required the
accord and consent of eight or ten senses, and their contribution, to
attaine a perspicuous insight of her, and see her in her true essence.
Those Sects which combate mans science, doe principally combate the
same by the uncertainty and feeblenesse of our senses.  For, since by
their meane and intermission all knowledge comes unto us, if they
chance to misse in the report they make unto us, if either they
corrupt or alter that, which from abroad they bring unto us, if the
light which by them is transported into our soule be obscured in the
passage, we have nothing else to hold by.  From this extreme
difficultie are sprung all these phantazies, which everie subject
containeth, whatsoever we finde in it, that it hath not what we
suppose to finde in it, and that of the Epicurians, which is; that the
sunne is no greater than our sight doth judge it:

  Quicquid id est, nihilo fertur maiore figura,

  Quam nostris oculis quam cernimus esse videtur:/1

  Whate'er it be, it in no greater forme doth passe,

  Then to our eyes, which it behold, it seeming was:


that the apparances, which represent a great body to him that is neare
unto it, and a much lesser to him that is further from it, are both
true:

  Nec tamen hic oculis falli concedimzus hilum: Proinde animi vitium
  hoc oculis adfingere noli:/2

  Yet graunt we not, in this, our eyes deceiv'd or blind, Impute not
  then to eyes this error of the mind:

and resolutely, that there is no deceit in the senses that a man must
stand to their mercy, and elsewhere seek reasons to excuse the
difference and contradiction we find in them: yea invent all other
untruthes and raving conceits (so farre come they) rather than accuse
the senses.  Timagoras swore, that howsoever he winked or turned his
eyes, he could never perceive the light of the candle to double: and
that this seeming proceeded from the vice of opinion, and not from the
instrument.  Of all absurdities the most absurd amongst the Epicurians
is to disavow the force and effect of the senses.

  Proinde quod in quoque est his visum tempore, verum est: Et si non
  potuit ratio dissolvere causam,

  Cur ed quae fuerint iuxtim quadrata, procul sint


----- 1 LUCR. 1. v. 676. 2 Ib. 1. iv. 380.

  Viarotunda: tamen praestat rationis egentem

  Reddere mendose causas vtriusque figurae,

  Quam manibus manifesta suis emittere quoquam,

  Et violare fidem primam, et convellere tota

  Fundamenta, quibus nixatur vita salusque.

  Non modo enim ratio ruat omnis, vita quoque ipsa

  Concidat extemplo, nisi credere sensibus ausis, Praecipitesque locos
  vitare, et caetera quae sint

  In genere hoc fugienda./1

  What by the eyes is seene at any time, is true,

  Though the cause treason could not render of the view,

  Why, what was square at hand, a farre off seemed round,

  Yet it much better were, that wanting reasons ground

  The causes of both formes we harp-on, but not hit,

  Then let slip from our hands things cleare, and them omit,

  And violate our first beliefe, and rashly rend

  All those grounorkes, whereon both life and health depend,

  For not alone all reason falls, life likewise must

  Faile out of hand, unlesse your senses you dare trust,

  And breake-neeke places, and all other errours shunne,

  From which we in this kinde most carefully should runne.

This desperate and so little Philosophicall counsell, represents no
other thing but that humane science cannot be maintained but by
unreasonable, fond and mad reason; yet is it better that man use it to
prevaile, yea and of all other remedies else how phantasticall soever
they be, rather than avow his necessarie foolishnesse.: So
prejudiciall and disadvantageous a veritie he cannot avoide, but
senses must necessarily be the Soveraigne maisters of his knowledge;
but they are uncertaine and falsifiable to all circumstances.  There
must a man strike to the utmost of his power, and if his just forces
faile him (as they are wont) to use and employ obstinacie, temeritie
and impudencie.  If that which the Epicurians affirme, be true, that
is to say, we have no science, if the apparances of the senses be
false, and that which the Stoicks say, if it is also true that the
senses apparences are so false as they can produce us no science; we
will conclude at the charges of these two great Dogmatist Sects, that
there is no science.  Touching

----- 1 LUCR. 1. iv. 502.

the error and uncertaintie of the senses operation, a man may store
himselfe with as many examples as he pleaseth, so ordinary are the
faults and deceits they use towards us.  And the echoing or reporting
of a valleys the sound of a trumpet seemeth to sound before us, which
cometh a mile behind us.

  Exstantesque procul medio de gargite montes

  Idem apparent longe diversi licet./1

  Et fugere ad puppim colles campique videntur

  Quos agimus prater navim./2


  -----ubit in medio nobis equus acer abhaesit

  Flumine, equi corpus transversum ferre videtur


  Vis, et in adversum flumen contrudere raptim./3

  And hills, which from the maine far-off to kenning stand,

  Appeare all one, though they farre distant be, at hand,

  And hilles and fields doe seeme unto our boate to flie,

  Which we drive by our boate as we doe passe thereby,

  When in midst of a streame a stately Horse doth stay,

  The streame's orethwarting seemes his body crosse to sway,

  And swiftly 'gainst the streame to thrust him th' other way.


To roule a bullet under the fore finger, the midlemost being put over
it, a man must very much enforce himselfe to affirme there is but one,
so assuredly doth our sense present us two.  That the senses do often
maister our discourse, and force it to receive impressions which he
knoweth and judgeth to be false, it is daily seene.  I leave the sense
of feeling which hath his functions neerer more quicke and
substantiall, and which by the effect of the griefe or paine it brings
to the body doth so often confound and re-enverse all these goodly
Stoicall+ resolutions, and enforceth to cry out of the bellyache him
who hath with all resolution established in his mind this doctrine,
that the cholike, as every other sicknesse or paine, is a thing
indifferent, wanting power to abate any thing of soveraigne good or
chiefe felicity, wherein the wise man is placed by his owne vertue:
there is no heart so demisse, but the rattling sound of a drum or the
clang of a trumpet will rowse and inflame; nor mind so harsh and
sterne, but

----- 1 LUCR. 1. iv. 398. 2 Ib. 390. 3 Ib. 423.

the sweetnesse and harmony of musicke will move and tickle; nor any
soule so skittish and stubborne, that hath not a feeling of some
reverence in considering the clowdy vastitie and gloomie canapies of
our churches, the eye-pleasing diversitie of ornaments, and orderly
order of our ceremonies, and hearing the devout and religious sound of
our organs, the moderate, symphonicall, and heavenly harmonie of our
voices: even those that enter into them with an obstinate will and
contemning minde have in their hearts a feeling of remorse, of
chilnesse and horrour, that puts them into a certaine diffidence of
their former opinions.  As for me, I distrust mine owne strength to
heare with a settled minde some of Horace or Catullus verses sung with
a sufficiently well tuned voice, uttered by and proceeding from a
faire, yong, and hart-alluring mouth.  And Zeno had reason to say that
the voice was the flower of beautie.  Some have gone about to make me
beleeve that a man, who most of us French men know, in repeating of
certaine verses he had maide, had imposed upon me that they were not
such in writing as in the aire, and that mine eyes would judge of them
otherwise than mine eares: so much credit hath pronounciation to give
price and fashion to those workes that passe at her mercy; whereupon
Philoxenus was not to be blamed, when hearing one to give an ill
accent to some composition of his, he tooke in a rage some of his pots
or bricks, and breaking them, trode and trampled them under his feet,
saying unto him, 'I breake and trample what is thine, even as thou
manglest and marrest what is mine.  Wherefore did they (who with an
undanted resolve have procured their owne death, because they would
not see the blow or stroke comming) turne their face away?  And those
who for their health's sake cause themselves to be cut and cauterized,
why cannot they endure the sight of the preparations, tooles,
instruments and workes of the Chirurgion, since the sight can have no
part of the paine or smart?  Are not these fit examples to verifie the
authoritie which senses have over discourse?  We may long enough know
that such a ones lockes or flaring tresses are borrowed of a page or
taken from some lacky, that this faire ruby-red came from Spaine, and
this whitenes or smoothnes from the ocean sea: yet must sight force us
to find and deeme the subject more lovely and more pleasing against
all reason.  For in that there is nothing of its owne.

  Auferimur cultu: gemnis, auroque teguntur

  Crimina, pars minima est ipsa puelia sui.

  Saepe ubi sit quod ames inter tam multa requiras

  Decepit hac oculos AEgide dives amor./1

  We are misse-led by ornaments: what is amisse

  Gold and gemmes cover, least part of her selfe the maiden is,

'Mongst things so many you may aske, where your love lies, Rich love
  by this Gorgonian shield deceives thine eye.

  How much doe Poets ascribe unto the vertue of the senses which makes
  Narcissus to have even fondly lost himselfe for the love of his
  shadow?

  Cunctaque miratur, quibus est mirabilis ipsa,

  Se cupit imprudens, et qui probat, ipse probatur,

  Dumque petit petitur: pariterque accendit et ardit./2

  He all admires, whereby himselfe is is admirable,

  Fond he, fond of himseife, to himselfe amiable,

  He that doth like, is lik'd, and while he doth desire:

  He is desired, at once he burnes and sets on fire.

  And Pygmalions wit's so troubled by the impression of the sight of
  his ivory statue that hee loves and serves it as if it had life:

  Osculadat, reddique putat, sequiturque, tenetque

  Et credit tactis digitos insidere membris,

  Et metuit pressos veniat ne livor in artus./3

  He kisses, and thinks kisses come againe,

  He sues, pursues, and holds, beleeves in vaine

  His fingers sinke where he doth touch the place,

  And feares least black and blew toucht-lims deface.


----- 1 OVID.  Rem.  Am. 1. i. 343. 2 Ib.  Metam. 1. iii. 424. 3
Ib. 1. x. 256.


Let a Philosopher be put in a cage made of small and thin- set iron
wire, and hanged on the top of our Ladies Church steeple in Paris; he
shall, by evident reason, perceive that it is impossible he should
fall down out of it: yet can he not choose (except he have beene
brought up to the trade of tilers or thatchers) but the sight of that
exceeding height must needs dazle his sight, and amaze or turne his
senses.  For we have much ado to warrant our selves in the walks or
battlements of a high tower or steeple, if they be hattlemented and
wrought with pillars, and somewhat wide one from another, although of
stone and never so strong. Nay, some there are that call scarcely
think or heare of such heights. Let a beame or planke be laid acrosse
from one of those two steeples to the other, as big, as thick, as
strong, and as broad as would suffice any man to walke safely upon it,
there is no philosophicall wisdome of so great resolution and
constancie that is able to encourage and perswade us to march upon it,
as we would were it below on the ground.  I have sometimes made triall
of it upon our mountaines on this side of Italie, yet am I one of
those that will not easily be affrighted with such things, and I could
not without horror to my minde and trembling of legs and thighes
endure to looke on those infinite precipices and steepy downe-fals,
though I were not neere the brim, nor any danger within my length and
more; and unlesse I had willingly gone to the perill, I could not
possibly have falne. Where I also noted that how deep soever the
bottome were, if but a tree, a shrub, or any out-butting crag of a
rock presented it selfe unto our eyes upon those steepe and high
Alpes, somewhat to uphold the sight; and divide the same, it doth
somewhat ease and assure us from feare, as if it were a thing which in
our fall might either helpe or upheld us: and that we cannot without
some dread and giddinesse in the head so much as abide to looke upon
one of those even and downe- right precipices: Vt despici sine
vertigine simul oculorum animique non possit: 'So as they cannot looke
downe without giddinesse both of eyes and mindes: which is an evident
deception of the sight.  Therefore was it that a worthy Philosopher
pulled out his eyes that so he might discharge his soule of the
seducing and diverting he received by them, and the better and more
freely apply himselfe unto Philosophy.  But by this accompt, he should
also have stopped his eares, which (as Theopbrastus said) are the most
dangerous instruments we have to receive violent and sodaine
impressions to trouble and alter us, and should in the end have
deprived himself of all his other senses; that is to say, both of his
being and life.  For they have the power to command our discourses and
sway our minde: Fit etiam saepe specie quadam, saepe vocum gravitate
et cantibus, vt pellantur animi vehementius: saepe etiam cura et
timore:/1 'It comes to passe that many times our mindes are much moved
with some shadow, many times with deep sounding or singing of voices,
many times with care and feare.' Physitians hold that there are
certain complexions which by some sounds and instruments are agitated
even unto furie.  I have seene some who, without infringing their
patience, could not well heare a bone gnawne under their table: and we
see few men but are much troubled at that sharpe, harsh, and
teeth-edging noise that smiths make in filing of brasse, or scraping
of iron and steele together: others will be offended if they but heare
one chew his meat somewhat aloud; nay, some will be angrie with or
hate a man that either speaks in the nose or rattles in the throat.
That piping prompter of Gracchus, who mollified, raised, and wound his
masters voice whilst be was making orations at Rome; what good did he
if the motion and qualitie of the sound had not the force to move and
efficacy to alter the auditories judgement: Verily there is great
cause to make so much ado, and keepe such a coyle about the constancie
and firmnesse of this goodly piece, which suffers it selfe to be
handled, changed, and turned by the motion and accident of so light a
winde.  The very same cheating and cozening that senses bring to our

----- 1 CIC.  Div. 1. i.

understanding, themselves receive it in their turnes.  Our mind doth
likewise take revenge of it, they lie, they cog, and deceive one
another a vie.  What we see and heare, being passionately transported
by anger, we neither see nor heare it as it is.

  Et solem geminum, et duplices se ostendere Thebas./1

  That two Sunnes doe appeare,

  And double Thebes are there.

  The object which we love seemeth much more fairer unto us then it
  is:

  Multimodis igitur pravos turpesque videmus

  Esse in delitiis, summoque in honore vigere:/2

  We therefore see that those, who many waies are bad,

  And fowle, are yet belov'd, and in chiefe honour had;

and that much fowler which we loath.  To a pensive and heart- grieved
man a cleare day seemes gloomie and duskie.  Our senses are not onely
altered but many times dulled, by the passions of the mind.  How many
things see we, which we perceive not, if our mind be either busied or
distracted elsewhere?

  -----in rebus quoque apertis noscere possis,

  Si non advertas animum, proinde esse, quasi omni


  Tempore semotae fuerint, longeque remotae./3

  Ev'n in things manifest it may be seene,

  If you marke not, they are, as they had beene

  At all times sever'd farre, remooved cleane.

The soule seemeth to retire her selfe into the inmost parts, and
ammuseth the senses faculties: so that both the inward and outward
parts of man are full of weaknes and falshood.  Those which have
compared our life unto a dreame, have happily had more reason so to
doe then they were aware.  When we dreame, our soule liveth, worketh
and exerciseth all her faculties, even and as much as when it waketh;
and if more softly and obscurely, yet verily not so, as that it may
admit so

----- 1 VIRG.  AEn. 1. iv. 470. 2 LUCR. 1. iv. 1147. 3 Ib. 808.

great a difference as there is betweene a dark night and a cleare day:
  yea as betweene a night and a shadow: there it sleepeth, here it
  slumbreth: more or lesse they are ever darknesses, yea Cimmerian
  darknesses.  We wake sleeping, and sleep waking.  In my sleep I see
  not so cleare; yet can I never find my waking cleare enough, or
  without dimnesse.  Sleepe also, in his deepest rest, doth sometimes
  bring dreames asleepe: but our waking is never so vigilant as it may
  clearely purge and dissipate the ravings or idle phantasies which
  are the dreames of the waking, and worse then dreames.  Our reason
  and soule, receiving the phantasies and opinions, which sleeping
  seize on them, and authorising our dreames actions, with like
  approbation, as it doth the daies, why make we not a doubt whether
  our thinking and our working be another dreaming, and our waking
  some kind of sleeping?  If the senses be our first judges, it is not
  ours that must only be called to counsell: for, in this facultie,
  beasts have as much (or more) right as we.  It is most certaine that
  some have their hearing more sharpe than man; others their sight;
  others their smelling; others their feeling, or taste.  Democritus
  said that Gods and beasts had the sensitive faculties much more
  perfect than man.  Now, betweene the effects of their senses and
  ours the difference is extreame.  Our spettle cleanseth and drieth
  our sores, and killeth serpents.  Tantaque in his rebus distantia
  differitasque est,

  Ut quod alus cibus est, aliis fuat acre venenum.

  Saepe etenim serpens, hominis contacta saliva,

  Disperit, ac sese mandendo conficit ipsa./1

  There is such distance, and such difference in these things,

  As what to one is meate, t'another poison brings. {EBWhite+}

  For oft a Serpent toucht with spettle of a man

  Doth die, and gnaw it selfe with fretting all he can.

What qualitie shall we give unto spettle, either according to us or
according to the serpent? by which two senses shall we verifie its
true essence, which we

----- 1 LUCR. 1. iv. 640.

seeke for?  Pliny saith that there are certaine seahares in India that
to us are poison, and we bane to them; so that we die if we but touch
them; now whether is man or the sea-hare poison?  Whom shall we
beleeve, either the fish of man or the man of fish?  Some quality of
the ayre infecteth man which nothing at all hurteth the one: some
other the oxe, and not man: which of the two is, either in truth or
nature, the pestilent quality? Such as are troubled with the yellow
jandise deeme all things tey looks upon to be yellowish, which seeme
more pale and wan to them then to us.

  Lurida praeterea fiunt quaecunque tuentur

  Arquati./1

  And all that jaundis'd men behold,

  They yellow straight or palish hold.

Those which are sicke of the disease which phisitians call
Hyposphagma, which is a suffusion of blood under the skin, imagine
that all things they see are bloodie and red.  Those humours that so
change the sights operation, what know we whether they are predominant
and ordinarie in beasts?  For we see some whose eyes are as yellow as
theirs that have the jandise, others that have them all blood-shotten
with rednesse: it is likely that the objects collour they looke upon
seemeth otherwise to them then to us: which of the two judgements
shall be true?  For it is not said that the essence of things hath
reference to man alone.  Hardnesse, whitenesse, depth, and sharpnesse
touch the service and concerne the knowledge of beasts as well as
ours: Nature hath given the use of them to them as well as to us.
When we winke a little with our eye, wee perceive the bodies we looke
upon to seeme longer and outstretched.  Many beasts have their eye as
winking as we.  This length is then happily the true forme of that
body, and not that which our eyes give it, being in their ordinarie
seate. If we close our eye above, things seeme double unto us

----- 1 LUCR. 1. iv. 333.

  Bina lucernarum florentia lumina flammis

  Et duplices hominum facies, et corpora bina./1

  The lights of candles double flaming then;

  And faces twaine, and bodies twaine of men

If our eares chance to be hindred by any thing, or that the passage of
our hearing bee stopt, we receive the sound otherwise then we were
ordinarily wont.  Such beasts as have hairie eares, or that in lieu of
an eare have but a little hole, doe not by consequence heare that we
heare, and receive the sound other then it is.  We see at solemn
shewes or in theatres that, opposing any collourd glasse betweene our
eyes and the torches light, whatsoever is in the roome seemes or
greene, or yellow, or red unto us, according to the collour of the
glasse:

  Et vulgo faciunt id lutea russague vela,

  Et ferruginea, cum magnis intenta theatris

  Per malos volgata trabesque trementia pendent,:

  Namque ibi consessum caveat subter, et omnem

  Scenai speciem, patrum matrumque deorumque

  Inficiunt coguntque suo fluitare colore./2

  And yellow, russet, rustic curtained worke this feate

  In common sights abroade, where over skaffold's great

  Stretched on masts, spred over beames, they hang still waving.

  All the seates circuit there, and all the stages braving,

  Of fathers, mothers, Gods, and all the circle showe

  They double-dye and in their colours make to flowe.

It is likely that those beasts eyes which we see to be of divers
collours, produce the apparances of those bodies they looke upon to be
like their eyes.  To judge the senses operation, it were then
necessary we were first agreed with beasts, and then betweene our
selves; which we are not, that ever-and-anon disputing about that one
seeth, heareth, or tasteth something to be other then indeed it is;
and contend as much as about any thing else, of the diversity of those
images our senses report unto us.  A yong child heareth, seeth,

----- 1 LUCR. 1. iv. 452, 454. 2 Ib. 73.

and tasteth otherwise, by natures ordinary rule, then a man of thirtie
yeares; and he otherwise then another of threescore.  The senses are
to some more obscure and dimme, and to some more open and quicke.  We
receive things differently, according as they are and seeme unto us.
Things being then so uncertaine and full of controversie, it is no
longer a wonder if it be told us that we may avouch snow to seeme
white unto us; but to affirme that it's such in essence and in truth,
we cannot warrant ourselves: which foundation being so shaken, all the
science in the world must necessarily goe to wracke.  What, doe our
senses themselves hinder one another?  To the sight a picture seemeth
to be raised aloft, and in the handling flat: shall we say that muske
is so pleasing or no, which comforteth our smelling and offendeth our
taste?  There are hearbs and ointments which to some parts of the body
are good, and to other some hurtfull.  Honie is pleasing to the taste,
but unpleasing to the sight.  Those jewefl wrought and fashioned like
feathers or sprigs, which in impreses are called feathers without
ends, no eye can discerne the bredth of them, and no man warrant
himselfe from this deception, that on the one end or side it groweth
not broder and broder, sharper and sharper, and on the other more and
more narrow, especially being rouled about ones finger, when
notwithstanding in handling it seemeth equal in bredth, and every
where alike.  Those who to encrease and aide their luxury were
anciently wont to use perspective or looking glasses, fit to make the
object they represented appeare very big and great, that so the
members they were to use might, by that ocular increase, please them
the more: to whether of the two senses yeelded they, either to the
sight presenting those members as big and great as they wisht them, or
to the feeling that presented them little and to be disdained?  Is it
our senses that lend these diverse conditions unto subjects, when for
all that the subjects have but one? as we see in the Bread we eat: it
is but Bread, but one using it, it maketh bones, blood, flesh, haire,
and nailes thereof:

  Ut cibus in membra atque artus cum diditur omnes

  Disperit, atque aliam naturam sufficit ex se./1

  As meate distributed into the members, dies,

  Another nature yet it perishing supplies.

The moistnesse which the roote of a tree suckes becomes a trunke, a
leafe, and fruite: And the aire being but one, applied unto a trumpet,
becommoth diverse in a thousand sorts of sounds.  Is it our senses
(say I) who likewise fashion of diverse qualities those subjects, or
whether they have them so and such?  And upon this doubt, what may wee
conclude of their true essence? Moreover, since the accidents of
sicknesse, of madnesse, or of sleepe, make things appeare other unto
us then they seeme unto the healthy, unto the wise, and to the waking:
is it not likely that our right seate and naturall humors have also
wherewith to give a being unto things, having reference unto their
condition, and to appropriate them to it selfe, as doe inordinate
humors; and our health as capable to give them his visage as
sicknesse?  Why hath not the temperate man some forme of the objects
relative unto himselfe as the intemperate: and shall not he likewise
imprint his character in them?  The distasted impute wallowishnes unto
wine: the healthier good taste; and the thirsty, brisknesse, rellish,
and dellicacie. Now our condition appropriating things unto it selfe,
and transforming them to its owne humour: wee know no more how things
are in sooth and truth; for nothing comes unto us but falsified and
altered by our senses.  Where the compasses, the quadrant, or the
ruler are crooked, all proportions drawne by them, and all the
buildings erected by their measure, are also necessarily defective and
imperfect.  The uncertaintie of our senses yeelds what ever they
produce, also uncertaine.

  Denique ut in fabrica, si prava est regula prima,

  Normaque si fallax rectis regionibus exit,

  Et libella aliqua si ex parte claudicat hilum,

  Omnia mendose fieri, atque obstipa necessum EST,


----- 1 LUCR. 1. iii. 728.

  Prava, cubantia, prona, supina, atque absona tecta,

  Iam ruere ut quaedam videantur velle, ruantque Prodita judiciis
  fallacibus

  omnia primis.

  Hic igitur ratio tibi rerum prava necesse est,

  Falsaque sit falsis quaecunque a sensibus orta est./1

  As in building if the first rule be to blame,

  And the deceitful squire erre from right forms and frame,

  If any instrument want any jot of weight,

  All must needs faultie be, and stooping in their height,

  The building naught, absurd, upward and downeward bended,

  As if they meant to fall, and fall, as they intended;

  And all this as betrayde

  By judgements formost laid.

  Of things the reason therefore needs must faultie bee

  And false, which from false senses drawes its pedigree.

As for the rest, who shall bee a competent Judge in these differences?
As wee said in controversies of religion, that we must have a judge
inclined to either party, and free from partialitie, or affection,
which is hardly to be had among Christians; so hapneth it in this: For
if he be old he cannot judge of ages sense, himself being a party in
this controversie: and so if he be yong, healthy, sicke, sleeping, or
waking, it is all one: We had need of some body void and exempted from
all these qualities, that without any preoccupation of judgement might
judge of these propositions as indifferent unto him: by which accompt
we should have a judge that were no man.  To judge of the apparances
that we receive of subjects, we had need have a judicatorie
instrument: to verifie this instrument we should have demonstration;
and to approve demonstration, an instrument; thus are we ever turning
round.  Since the senses cannot determine our disputation, themselves
being so full of uncertainty, it must then be reason: and no reason
can be astiblished without another reason: then are we ever going
backe unto infinity.  Our phantasie doth not apply it selfe to strange
things, but is rather conceived by the interposition of senses; and
senses cannot comprehend a strange subject; nay, not so much as their
owne

----- 1 LUCR. 1. iv. 514

passions: and so, nor the phantasie, nor the apparence is the
subject's, but rathier the passion's only, and sufferance of the
sense: which passion and subject are divers things: Therefore, who
judgeth by apparences, judgeth by a thing different from the subject.
And to say that the senses' passions referre the qualitie of strange
subjects by resemblance unto the soule: How can the soule and the
understanding rest assured of that resemblance, having of it selfe no
commerce with forraigne subjects?  Even as he that knowes not
Socrates, seeing his picture, cannot say that it resembleth him.  And
would a man judge by apparences, be it by all it is impossible; for by
their contraries and differences they hinder one another, as we see by
experience.  May it be that some choice apparences rule and direct the
others?  This choice must be verified by another choice, the second by
a third: and so shal we never make an end.  In few, there is no
constant existence, neither of our being, nor of the objects.  And we
and our judgement and all mortall things else do uncessantly rowle,
turns and passe away. Thus can nothing be certainely established, nor
of the one nor of the other; both the judgeing and the judged being in
continuall alteration and motion. We have no communication with being;
for every humane nature is ever in the middle betweene being borne and
dying; giving nothing of it selfe but an obscure apparence and shadow,
and an uncertaine and weake opinion.  And if perhaps you fix your
thought to take its being, it would be even as if one should go about
to graspe the water: for, how much the more he shal close and presse
that which by its owne nature is ever gliding, so much the more he
shall loose what he would hold and fasten.  Thus, seeing all things
are subject to passe from one change to another, reason, which therein
seeketh a reall subsistence, findes her selfe deceived as unable to
apprehend any thing subsistent and permanent: forsomuch as each thing
either commeth to a being, and is not yet altogether: or beginneth to
dy before it be borne.  Plato said that bodies had never an existence
but indeed a birth, supposing that Homer made the Ocean Father, and
Thetis Mother of the Gods, thereby to shew us that all things are in
continuall motion, change and variation.  As he sayeth, a common
opinion amongst all the Philosophers before his time, only Parmenides
excepted, who denied any motion to be in things of whose power he
maketh no small accompt.  Pythagoras that each thing or matter was
ever gliding and labile.  The Stoicks affirme there is no present
time, and that which we call present is but conjoyning and assembling
of future time and past. Heraclitus avereth that no man ever entered
twice one same river; Epicharmus avoucheth that who ere while borrowed
any money doth not now owe it; and that he who yesternight was bidden
to dinner this day, commeth to day unbidden: since they are no more
themselves, but are become others; and that one mortall substance
could not twise be found in one self estate: for by the sodainesse and
lightnesse of change sometimes it wasteth, and other times it
assembleth; now it comes and now it goes; in some sort, that he who
beginneth to be borne never comes to the perfection of being.  For,
this being borne commeth never to an end, nor ever stayeth as being at
an end; but after the seed proceedeth continually in change and
alteration from one to another.  As of mans seed there is first made a
shapelesse fruit in the Mothers Wombe, then a shapen Childe, then
being out of the Wombe, a sucking babe, afterward he becometh a ladde,
then consequently a stripling, then a full growne man, then an old
man, and in the end an aged decrepite man.  So that age and subsequent
generation goeth ever undoing and wasting the precedent.

  Mutat enim mundi naturam totius aetas,

  Ex alioque alius status excipere omnia debet,

  Nec manet vlla sui similis res, omnia migrant,

  Omnia commutat natura et vertere cogit./1


----- 1 LUCR. 1. v. 837.

  Of th'universall world, age doth the nature change,

  And all things from one state must to another range,

  No one thing like it selfe remaines, all things doe passe,

  Nature doth change, and drive to change, each thing that was.

And then we doe foolishly feare a kind of death, whenas we have
already past and dayly passe to many others; for, not only (as
Heraclitus said) the death of fire is a generation of ayre: and the
death of ayre a generation of water: but also we may most evidently
see it in our selves.  The flower of age dieth, fadeth and fleeteth,
when age comes upon us, and youth endeth in the flower of a full
growne mans age: childhood in youth and the first age dieth in
infancie: and yesterday endeth in this day, and to day shall die in to
morrow.  And nothing remaineth or ever continueth in one state.  For
to prove it, if we should ever continue one and the same, how is it
then that now we rejoyce at one thing, and now at another?  How comes
it to passe we love things contrary, or we bath them, or we love them,
or we blame them?  How is it that we have different affections holding
no more the same sense in the same thought?  For it is not likely that
without alteration we should take other passions, and what admitteth
alterations continueth not the same; and if it be not one selfe same,
then it is not: but rather with being all one, the simple being doth
also change, ever becoming other from other.  And by consequence
Natures senses are deceived and lie falsly; taking what appeareth for
what is, for want of truly knowing what it is that is.  But then what
is it that is indeed?  That which is eternall, that is to say, that
which never had birth, nor ever shall have end; and to which no time
can bring change or cause alteration.  For time is a fleeting thing,
and which appeareth as in a shadow, with the matter ever gliding,
alwaies fluent without ever being stable or permanent; to whom rightly
belong these termes, Before and After, and it Hath beene, or Shall be.
Which at first sight doth manifestly shew that it is not a thing which
is: for it were great sottishnesse and apparent falsehood, to say that
that is which is not yet in being, or that already hath ceased from
being.  And concerning these words, Present, Instant, Even now, by
which it seemes that especially we uphold and principally ground the
intelligence of time; reason discovering the same doth forthwith
destroy it: for presently it severeth it asunder and divideth it into
future and past times as willing to see it necessarily parted in two.
As much hapneth unto nature which is measured according unto time,
which measureth her: for no more is there any thing in her that
remaineth or is subsistent; rather all things in her are either borne
or ready to be borne or dying. By means whereof it were a sinne to say
of God, who is the only that is, that he was or shall be: for these
words are declinations, passages, or vicissitudes of that which cannot
last nor continue in being.  Wherefore we must conclude, that only God
is, not according to any measure of time, but according to an
immoveable and immutable eternity, not measured by time nor subject to
any declination, before whom nothing is, nor nothing shall be after,
nor more new nor more recent, but one really being: which by one onely
Now or Present, filleth the Ever, and there is nothing that truly is
but he alone: without saying he has bin or he shall be, without
beginning and sans ending.  To this so religious conclusion of a
heathen man I will only add this word, taken from a testimony of the
same condition, for an end of this long and tedious discourse, which
might well furnish me with endlesse matter. 'Oh, what a vile and
abject thing is man (saith he) unlesse he raise himselfe above
humanity!' Observe here a notable speech and a profitable desire; but
likewise absurd.  For to make the handful] greater than the hand, and
the embraced greater than the arme, and to hope to straddle more than
our legs length, is impossible and monstrous: nor that man should
mount over and above himselfe or humanity; for he cannot see but with
his owne eyes, nor take hold but with his owne armes.  He shall raise
himself up, if it please God to lend him his helping hand.  He may
elevate himselfe by forsaking and renouncing his owne meanes, and
suffering himseIfe to be elevated and raised by meere heavenly meanes.
It is for our Christian faith, not for his Stoicke vertue, to pretend
or aspire to this divine Metamorphosis, or miraculous transmutation.

CHAPTER 2.XIII+ OF JUDGING OF OTHERS' DEATH+

WHEN we judge of others assurance or boldnesse in death, which without
all peradventure is the most remarkeable action of humane life, great
heed is to be taken of one thing, which is, that a man will hardly
beleeve he is come to that point.  Few men die with a resolution that
it is their last houre: and nowher doth hopes deceit ammuse us more.
She never ceaseth to ring in our eares that others have been sicker
and yet have not died: the cause is not so desperate as it is taken;
and if the worst happen, God hath done greater wonders.  The reason
is, that we make too much account of our selves, It seemeth that the
generality of things doth in some sort suffer for our annullation and
takes compassion of our state.  Forsomuch as our sight, being altered,
represents unto itselfe things alike; and we imagine that things faile
it as it doth to them: As they who travell by sea, to whom mountaines,
fields, townes, heaven and earth, seeme to goe the same motion, and
keepe the same course they doe:

  Provehimur portu, terraeque vrbesque recedunt./1

  We sayling launch from harbour, and

  Behinde our backes leave townes, leave land.

Who ever saw old age that commended not times past, and blamed not the
present, charging the world and mens customes with her misery and
lowring discontent?

  Iamque caput quassans grandis suspirat orator,

  Et cum tempora temporibus prmsentia confert


----- 1 VIRG.  AEn. 1. iii. 72.

  Praeteritis, laudat fortitnas saepe parentis

  Et crepat antiquum genus ut pietas repletum./1

  The gray-beard Plow-man sighes, shaking his hoarie head,

  Compares times that are now with times past heretofore.

  Praises the fortunes of his father long since dead,

  And crackes of ancient men, whose honesty was more.

We entertaine and carry all with us: Whence it followeth that we deeme
our death to be some great matter, and which passeth not so easily,
nor without a solemne consultation of the Starres; Tot circa unum
caput tumultuantes Deos: 'So many Gods keeping a stirre about one mans
life.  And so much the more we thinke it, by how much the more we
praise ourselves.  What? should so much learning and knowledge be lost
with so great dammage, without the Destinies particular care!  A soule
so rare and exemplar, costs it no more to be killed than a popular and
unprofitable soule?  This life that covereth so many others, of whom
so many other lives depend, that for his use possesseth so great a
part of the world and filleth so many places, is it displaced as that
which holdeth by its owne simple string?  No man of us thinkes it
sufficient to be but one.  Thence came those words of Caesar to his
pilot, more proudly swolne than the sea that threatned him:

  -----Italiam si, caelo authore, recusas,

  Me pete: sola tibi causa haec est iusta timoris,


  Vectorem non nosse tuum; perrumpe procellas

  Tutem secure mei:/2

  If Italie thou do refuse with heaven thy guide,

  Turn thee to me: to thee only just cause of feare

  Is that thy passenger thou know'st not: stormie tide

  Breake through, secure by guard of me, whom thou dost beare.

  And these:


  -----credit jam digna pericula Caesar

  Fatis esse suis: tantusque evertere (dixi)



  Me superis labor est, parvi quem puppe sedentem.

  Tam magno petiere mari./3

------- 1 LUCR. 1. ii. 118. 2 LUCAN. 1. iii. 579. 3 Ib. 653.

  Caesar doth now beleeve those dangers worthie are

  Of his set fate; and saies, doe Gods take so much pain

  Me to undoe, whom they thus to assault prepare

  Set in so small a skiffe, in such a surging maine?

And this common foppery that Phoebus for one whole yeare bare mourning
weedes on his forehead for the death of him

  Ille etiam extincto miseratus Caesare Romam,

  Cum caput obscura nitidum ferrugine texit./1

  The Sunne did pity take of Rome when Caesar dide,

  When he his radiant head in obscure rust did hide.

And a thousand such wherewith the world suffers it selfe to be so
easily conicatcht, deeming that our owne interests disturbe heaven,
and his infinite is moved at our least actions.  Non tanta caelo
societas nobiscum est, ut nostro fato mortalis sit ille quoque siderum
fulgar:/2 'There is no such societie betweene heaven and us, that by
our destinie the shining of the starres should be mortall as we are.
And to judge a resolution and constancie in him, who though he be in
manifest danger, doth not yet beleeve it, it is no reason; and it
sufficeth not that he die in that ward, unlesse he have directly and
for that purpose put himselfe into it:' it hapneth that most men set a
sterne countenance on the matter, looke big, and speake stoutly,
thereby to acquire reputation, which, if they chance to live, they
hope to enjoy.  Of all I have seene die, fortune' hath disposed their
countenances, but not their disseignes. And of those which in ancient
times have put themselves to death, the choice is great, whether it
were a sodaine death or a death having time and leasure. That cruell
Romane Emperor said of his prisoners that he would make them feele
death; and if any fortuned to kill himselfe in prison, that fellow had
escaped me (would he say).  He would extend and linger death, and
cause it be felt by torments.

----- 1 VIRG.  Georg. i. 466. 2 PLIN.  N.  Hist. ii. 8.

  Vidimus et toto quamvis in corpore caeso,

  Nil anima, lethale datum, moremque nefanda,

  Durum saevitiae, pereuntis parcere morti./1

  And we have seene, when all the body tortur'd lay,

  Yet no stroke deadly giv'n, and that in humane way

  Of tyranny, to spare his death that sought to die.

Verily, it is not so great a matter, being in perfect health and well
setled in mind, for one to resolve to kill himselfe: It is an easy
thing to show stoutnesse and play the wag before one come to the
pinch.  So that Heliogabalus, the most dissolute man of the world,
amidst his most riotous sensualities, intended, whensoever occasion
should force him to it, to have a daintie death.  Which, that it might
not degenerate from the rest of his life, he had purposely caused a
stately towre to be built, the nether part and forecourt whereof was
floored with boards richly set and enchased with gold and precious
stones, from off which he might beadlong throw himselfe downe: He had
also caused cordes to be made of gold and crimson silke, therewith to
strangle himselfe; and a rich golden rapier to thrust himselfe
through, and kept poison in boxes of Emeraldes and Topases, to poison
himselfe with, according to the humor he might have, to chuse which of
these deaths should please him.

  Impiger et fortis virtute coacta.

  A ready minded gallant,

  And in forst vallour valiant.

Notwithstanding, touching this man, the wantonnesse of his preparation
makes it more likely that he would have fainted had he beene put to
his triall.  But even of those who most undantedly have resolved
themselves to the execution, we must consider (I say) whether it were
with a life ending stroke, and that tooke away any leasure to feele
the effect thereof.  For it is hard to guesse seeing life droope away
little by little, the bodies-feeling entermingling it selfe with the

----- 1 LUCAN. 1. ii. 179.

soules, meanes of repentance being offered, whether in so dangerous an
intent, constancie or obstancie were found in him.  In Caesars civill
warres, Lucius Dominus taken in Prussia, having empoysoned himselfe,
did afterwards rue and repent his deede.  It hath hapned in our daies
that some having resolved to die, and at first not stricken deepe
enough, the smarting of his flesh, thrusting his arme backe, twice or
thrice more wounded himself, anew, and yet could never stricke
sufficiently deepe.  Whilst the arraignment of Plantius Silvanus was
preparing, Vrgulania, his grandfather, sent him a poignard, wherewith,
not able to kill himselfe thoroughly, he caused his owne servants to
cut his veines.  Albucilla, in Tiberius time, purposing to kill
herself, but striking over faintly, gave her enemies leasure to
apprehend and imprison her, and appoint her what death they pleased.
So did Captaine Demosthenes after his discomfiture in Sicilie.  And C.
Fimbria having over-feeblie wounded himselfe, became a sutor to his
boy to make an end of him.  On the other side, Ostorius, who forsomuch
as he could not use his owne arme, disdained to employ his servants in
any other thing but to hold his dagger stiffe and strongly; and taking
his running, himselfe carried his throate to its point, and so was
thrust through.  To say truth, it is a meate a man must swallow
without chewing, unlesse his throat be frostshod.  And therefore
Adrianus the emperour made his Physitian to marke and take the just
compasse of the mortall plac about his pap, that so his aime might not
faile him, to whom he had given charge to kill him.  Loe why Caesar
being demanded, which was the death he most allowed, answered, 'The
least premeditated, and the shortest.  If Caesar said it, it is no
faintness in me to beleeve it. 'A short death (saith Plinie) is the
chiefe happe of humane life.  It grieveth them to acknowledge it.  No
man can be said to be resolved to die that feareth to purchase it, and
that cannot abide to looke upon and out-stare it with open
eies. {death+} Those which in times of execution are seene to runne to
their end, and hasten the execution, do it

  not with resolution, but because they will take away time to
  consider the same; it grieves them not to be dead, but to die.

  Emori nolo, sed me esse mortuum, nihil aestimo./1

  I would not die too soone,

  But care not, when'tis done.

It is a degree of constancie+ unto which I have experienced to arive,
as those that cast themselves into danger, or into the sea, with
closed eies. In mine opinion there is nothing more worthy the noting
in Socrates+ life, then to have had thirty whole daies to ruminate his
deaths decree, to have digested it all that while, with an assured
hope, without dismay or alteration, and with a course of actions and
words rather supprest, and loose-hanging, then out-stretched and
raised by the weight of such a cogitation.  That Pomponius Atticus, to
whom Cicero writeth, being sicke, caused Agrippa, his sonne in lawe,
and two or three of his other friends, to be called for, to whom he
said, that having assaid how he got nothing in going about to be
cured, and what he did to prolong his life did also lenethen and
augment his griefe, he was now determined to make an end of one and
other; intreating them to allow of his determination, and that by no
meanes they would lose their labour to diswade him from it.  And
having chosen to end his life by abstinence, his sicknesse was cured
by accident.  The remedy he had employed to make himselfe away brought
him to health again.  The Physitians and his friends, glad of so happy
a successe and rejoycing thereof with him, were in the end greatly
deceived; for, with all they could do, they were never able to make
him alter his former opinions saying that as he must one day passe
that careire, ancl being now so forward, he would remove the care
another time to beginne againe.  This man baving with great leasure

----- 1 CIC.  Tusc.  Qu. 1. i.

apprehended death, is not only no whit discouraged when he comes to
front it, but resolutely falls upon it for being satisfied of that for
which he was entred the combate, in a braverie he thrust himselfe into
it, to see the end of it.  It is farre from fearing death to goe about
to taste and savour the same.  The historie of Cleanthes, the
Philosopher, is much like to this.  His gummes being swolne, his
Physitians perswaded him to use great abstinence.  Having fasted two
daies, he was so well amended, as they told him he was well, and might
returne to his wonted course of life.  He contrarily having already
tasted some sweetnes in this Painting, resolveth not to drawe back,
but to finish what he had so well begunne, and was so far waded into.
Tullius Marcellinus, a yong Romane gentleman, willing to prevent the
houre of his destiny, to ridde himselfe of a disease which tormented
him more than he would endure, although Physitians promised certainely
to cure him, howbeit not sodainely: called his friends unto him to
determine about it: some (saith Seneca) gave him that counsell, which
for weaknesse of heart themselves would have taken; others for
flatteries that which they imagined would be most pleasing unto him
but a certainStoike+ standing by, said thus unto him: 'Toile not thy
selfe, Marceliinus, as if thou determinedst some weightie matter: to
live is no such great thing, thy base groomes and bruit beasts live
also, but it is a matter of consequence to die honestly, wisely and
constantly.  Remember how long it is; thou doest one same thing, to
eate, to drinke, and sleepe; to drinke, to sleepe, to eate.  Wee are
ever uncessantly wheeling in this endlesse circle.  Not only bad and
intolerable accidents, but the very satiety to live, brings a desire
of death.  Marcellinus had no need of a man to counsell, but of one to
helpe him: his servants were afraid to meddle with him; but this
Philosopher made them to understand that familiars are suspected onely
when the question is, whether the maisters death hath beene voluntary:
otherwise it would bee as bad an example to hinder him as to kill him,
forasmuch as,

  Inuitum qui servat, idemfacit occidenti./1

  Who saves a man against his will

  Doth ev'a as much as he should kill.

Then he advertised Marcellinus, that it would not be unseemely, as
fruit or comfets at our tables, when our bellies be full, are given
unto bystanders, so, the life ended, to distribute something to such
as have beene the ministers of it.  Marcellinus being of a frank and
liberal disposition, caused certaine summes of mony to be divided
amongst his servants, and comforted them.  And for the rest there
needed neither yron nor blood; he undertooke to departe from this
life, not by running from it: not to escape from death, but to taste
it.  And to have leisure to conditione or bargaine with death having
quit all manner of nourishment, the third day ensuing, after he had
caused himselfe to be sprinkled over with luke-warme water, by little
and little he consumed away; and (as he said) not without some
voluptuousnesse and pleasure.  Verily, such as have had these
faintings and sownings of the heart, which proceed from weaknesses say
that they feele no paine at all in them, but rather some pleasure, as
of a passage to sleepe and rest.  These are premeditated and digested
deaths.  But that Cato+ alone, may serve to all examples of vertue, it
seemeth his good destiny caused that hand wherewith he gave himselfe
the fatall blow to be sicke and sore: that so bee might have leisure
to affront death and to embrace it, reenforcing his courage in that
danger in lieu of mollifieing the same.  And should I have represented
him in his proudest state, it should have beene all bloody- gored,
tearing his entraile, and rendiiig his gutts, rather then with a sword
in his hand, as did the statuaries of his time. For this second
murther was much more furious then the first.

----- 1 HOR.  Art.  Poet. 467.

CHAPTER 2.XIV+ HOW THAT OUR SPIRIT HINDERETH ITSELFE



IT is a pleasant imagination to conceive a spirit iustly ballanced
betweene two equall desires.  For, it is not to be doubted, that he
shall never be resolved upon any match: forsomuch as the application
and choise brings all the inequality of prise: And who should place us
betweene a bottle of wine and a gammon of bacon, with an equall
appetite to eat and drinke, doubtlesse there were noe remedy, but to
die of thirst and of hunger. To provide against this inconvenient,
when the Stoikes were demanded whence the election of two indifferent
things commeth into our soule (and which causeth that from out a great
number of Crownes or Angells we rather take one then another, when
there is no reason to induce us to preferre any one before others)
they answer, that this motion of the soule is extraorainarie and
irregular comming into us by a strange, accidentall and casuall
impulsion. In my opinion, it might rather be said that nothing is
presented unto us, wherein there is not some difference, how light so
ever it bee: And that either to the sight, or to the feeling, there is
ever some choice, which tempteth and drawes us to it, though
imperceptible and not to bee distinguished. In like manner, hee that
shall presuppose a twine-thrid equially strong all through, it is
impossible by all possibility that it should break, for, where would
you have the flaw or breaking to beginne?  And at once to break in all
places together is not in nature.  The Geometricall propositions
which, by the certainty of their demonstrations, conclude the
contained greater then the containing, and the centre as great as his
circumference; and that finde two lines uncessantly approaching one
unto another, which yet can never meete and joyne together; and the
Philosophers stone, and quadrature of the circle, where the reason and
the effects are so opposite: might peradventure draw thence some
argument to salve and belpe this bold speech of Pliny: Solum certum,
nihil esse certi, et homine nihil miserius aut superbius:/1 'This only
is sure, that there is nothing sure; and nothing more miserable, and
yet more arrogant then man. '{Yahoo+}

----- 1 PLIN.  Nat.  Hist. 1. ii. 7.
  
CHAPTER 2.XV+ THAT OUR DESIRES ARE ENCREASED BY DIFFICULTIE

THERE is no reason but hath another contrary unto it, saith the wisest
party of Philosophers.  I did erewhile ruminate upon this notable
saying, which an ancient writer alleageth for the contempt of life.
No good can bring us any pleasure, except that against whole losse we
are prepared: In aequo est, dolor amissae rei, et timor amittendae:/1
{fortune+}'Sorrow for a thing lost, and feare of losing it, are on an
even ground.' Meaning to gain thereby, that the fruition of life
cannot perfectly be pleasing unto us, if we stand in any feare to lose
it.  A man might nevertheless say on the contrary part, that we
embrace and claspe this good so much the harder, and with more
affection, as we perceive it to be less sure, and feare it should be
taken from us.  For, it is manifestly found, that as fire is rouzed up
by the assistance of cold, even so our will is whetted on by that
which doth resist it.

  Si nunquam Danaen habuisset ahenea turis,

  Non esset Danae de Iove facta parens./2

  If Danae had not beene clos'd in brazen

  Tower, Jove had not closed with Danae in golden shower,

And that there is nothing so naturally opposite to our taste as
satiety, which comes from ease and facility, nor nothing that so much
sharpneth it as rarenesse and difficulty.  Omnium rerum voluptas ipso
quo debet fugare periculo crescit: 'The delight of all things
encreaseth by the danger, whereby it rather should terrify them that
affect it.

----- 1 SEN.  Epist. xcviii. 2 OVID.  Amor. 1. ii.  El. xix. 27,


  Galla nega; satiatur amor, nisi gaudia torquent./1

  Good wench, deny, my love is cloied,

  Unlesse joyes grieve, before enjoyed.

To keepe love in breath and longing, Lycurgus ordained that the maried
men of Lacedemonia might never converse with their wives but by
stealth, and that it should be as great an imputation and shame to
finde them laide together, as if they were found living with
others. The difficulty of assignations or matches appointed, the
danger of being surprised, and the shame of ensuing to-morrow,

  ----- et languor, et silentium,

  Et latere petitus imo spiritus./2


  And whispering voice, and languishment,

  And breath in sighes from deepe sides sent.

are the things that give relish and tartnesse to the sawce.  How many
most lasciviously-pleasant sports proceed from modest and shamefast
manner of speech, of the daliances and workes of love?  Even
voluptuousnesse seekes to provoke and stirre it selfe up by smarting.
It is much sweeter when it itcheth, and endeared when it gauleth.  The
curtezan Flora was wont to say that she never lay with Pompey but she
made him carry away the markes of her teeth.

  Quod petiere premunt arcte, faciuntque dolorem

  Corpore, et dentes inlidant saepe labellis:

  Et stimuli subsunt, qui instigant laedere id ipsum

  Quodcumgue est, rabies unde illi germina surgunt,/3

So goes it every where: rarenesse and difficulty giveth esteeme unto
things. Those of Marca d'Ancona, in Italy, make their vowes, and goe
on pilgrimage rather unto Iames in Galicia, and those of Galicia
rather unto our Lady of Loreto.  In the country of Liege they make
more account of the Bathes of Luca; and they of Tuscany esteeme the
Baths of Spawe more than their

----- 1 MART. 1. iv.  Epig. xxxviii. 2 HOR.  Epod. xi. 13. 3
LUCR. 1. iv. 1070.

owne.  In Rome the Fence-schooles are ever full of Frenchmen, when few
Romans come unto them.  Great Cato, as well as any else, was even
cloied and distasted with his wife so long as she was his owne, but
when another mans, then wished he for ber, and would faine have lickt
his fingers at her.  I have heretofore put forth an old stalion to
soile, who before did no sooner see or smell a mare but was so lusty
that no man could rule him, nor no ground hold him; ease and facilitie
to come to his owne when he list, hath presently quailed his stomacke,
and so cloyed him that he is weary of them.  But toward strange mares,
and the first that passeth by his pasture, there is no hoe with him,
but suddenly he returnes to his old wonted neighings and furious
heate.  Our appetite doth contemne and passe over what he hath in his
free choice and owne possession, to runne after and pursue what he
hath not.

  Transuolat in medio posita, et fugientia captat./1

  It over flies what open lies,

  Pursuing onely that which flies.

  To forbid us anything is the ready way to make us long for it.

  -----nisi tu servare puellam

  Incipis, incipiet desinere ese mea,/2


  If you begin not your wench to enshrine,

  She will begin to leave off to be mine.


And to leave it altogether to our will is but to breede dislike and
  contempt in us.  So that to want and to have store breedeth one
  selfe same inconvenience.  Tibi quod super est, mihi quod desit,
  dolet./3

  You grieve because you have too much

  It grieves me that I have none such.


-------- 1 HOR.  Ser. 1. i.  Sat. ii. 107. 2 OVID.  Amor. 1. ii.
El. xix. 47. 3 TER. Phor. act i. sc. 3.


Wishing and enjoying trouble us both alike. The rigor of a mistris is
yrkesome, but ease and facility (to say true) much more; forasmuch as
discontent and vexation proceed of the estimation we have of the thing
desired, which sharpen love and set it afire.  Whereas satiety begets
distaste: it is a dull, blunt, weary, and drouzy passion.

  Si qua volet regnare diu, contemnat amantem,/1

  If any list long to beare sway,

  Scorne she her ]over, ere she play.


  -----contemnite amantes,

  Sic hodie veniet, si qua negavit heri,/2


  Lovers your lovers scorne, contemne, delude, deride

  So will shee come to-day, that yesterday denied.

Why did Poppea devise to maske the beauties of her face, but to endear
them to her lovers?  Why are those beauties vailed downe to the
heeles, which all desire to shew, which all wish to see?  Why doe they
cover with so many lets, one over another, those parts where chiefly
consisteth our pleasure and theirs?  And to what purpose serve those
baricadoes and verdugalles wherewith our women arme their flankes, but
to allure our appetite, and enveagle us to them by putting us off?

  Et fugit ad salices, et se cupit ante videri./3

  She to the willows runs to hide,

  Yet gladly would she first be spide,

  Interdum tunica duxit operta moram./4

  She cover'd with her cote in play,

  Did sometime make a short delay.

Whereto serves this mayden-like bashfulnesse, this willfull
quaintnesse, this severe countenance, this seeming ignorance of those
things which they know better than our selves, that goe about to
instruct them, but to increase a desire and endeare a longing in us to
vanquish,

----- 1 OVID.  Amor. 1. ii.  El. xix. 33. 2 PROPERT. 1. ii.
El. xiv. 19. 3 VIRG.  Buco.  Ecl. iii. 65. 4 PROPERT. 1. ii.
Eleg. xv. 6.

to gourmandize, and at our pleasure to dispose all this squeamish
ceremonie, and all these peevish obstacles?  For, it is not only a
delight but a glory to besot and debauch this dainty and nice
sweetnesse, and this infantine bashfullnesse, and to subject a marble
and sterne gravity to the mercy of our flame.  It is a glory (say
they) to triumph over modesty, chastity and temperance: and who
disswadeth ladies from these parts, betraieth both them and himselfe.
It is to be supposed that their heart yerneth for feare, that the
sound of our wordes woundeth the purity of their eares, for which they
hate us, and with a forced constraint agree to withstand our
importunitie. Beauty with all her might hath not wherewith to give a
taste of her selfe without these interpositions.  See in Italie, where
most, and of the finest beauty is to be sold, how it is forced to seek
other strange meanes, and suttle devices, arts and tricks, to yeeld
her selfe pleasing and acceptable: and yet in good sooth, doe what it
can, being venal and common, it remaineth feeble, and even
languishing.  Even as in vertue of two equall effects, we hold that
the fairest and worthiest, wherein are proposed more lets, and which
affordeth greater hazards.  It is an effect of Gods providence, to
suffer his holy Church to be vexed and turmoyled as we see with so
many troubles and stormes, to rouze and awaken by this opposition and
strife the godly and religious soules, and raise them from out a
lethall security and stupified slumber, wherein so long tranquility
had plunged them.  If we shall counterpoize the losse we have had by
the number of those that have strayed out of the right way, and the
profit that acrueth unto us, by having taken hart of grace, and by
reason of combate raised our zeale and forces; I wot not whether the
profit doth surmount the losse.  We thought to tie the bond of our
marriages the faster by removing all meanes to dissolve them, but by
how much faster that of constraint hath bin tried, so much more hath
that of our will and affection bin slacked and loosed: Whereas, on the
contrary side, that which so long time held mariages in honour and
safety in Rome, was the liberty to break them who list.  They kept
their wives the better, forsomuch as they might leave them; and when
divorces might freely be had, there past five hundred years and more
before any would ever make use of them.

  Quod licet, ingratum est, quod non licet, acrius urit./1

  What we may doe, doth little please:

  It woormes us more, that hath lesse ease.

To this purpose might the opinion of an ancient writer be adjoyned,
that torments do rather encourage vices than suppress them; that they
beget not a care of well-doing, which is the worke of reason and
discipline, but only a care not to be surprised in doing evil

  Latius excisae pestis contagia serpunt.

  Th' infection of the plague nigh spent

  And rooted out, yet further went.


I wot not whether it be true, but this I know by experience that
policie was never found to be reformed that way.  The order and
regiment of maners dependeth of some ther meane.  The Greeke stories
make mention of the Agrippians neighbouring upon Scithia, who live
without any rod or staffe of offence, where not onely no man
undertakes to buckle with any other man but whosoever can but save
himselfe, there (by reason of their vertue and sanctity of life) is as
it were in a Sanctuary: And no man dares so much as to touch him.
Many have recourse to them, to attone and take up quarrels and
differences, which arise amongst men else where. There is a nation
where the enclosure of gardens and fields they intend keepe severall,
are made with a seely twine of cotton, which amongst them is found to
be more safe and fast than are our ditches and hedges.  Furem signata
sollicitant, Aperta ffractarius praeterit:/2 'Things sealed up
solicite a thief to break them open: 'Whereas a common burglayer will
passe by quietly things that lie open.  Amongst other

----- 1 OVID.  Amor. 1. ii.  El. xix. 3. 2 SEN.  Epist. lxix.

meanes, ease and facility doth haply cover and fence my house from the
violence of civill wares: Inclos-urer and fencing drawe on the
enterprise, and distrust, the offence.  I have abated and weakened the
souldiers designe by taking hazard and all means of military glory
from their exploite, which is wont to serve them, for a title, and
stead them for an excuse.  What is performed courageously, at what
time justice lieth dead, and law hath not her due course, is ever done
honourably.  I yeeld them the conquest of my house dastardly and
treacherous.  It is never shut to any that knocketh. It hath no other
guardian or Provision but a porter, as an ancient custome, and used
ceremony, who serveth not so much to defend my gate as to offer it
more decently and courteously to all comers.  I have nor watch nor
sentinell but what the starres keepe for mee.  That gentleman is much
to blame who makes a shew to stand upon his guards, except he be very
strong indeed. Who so is open on one side is so every where.  Our
fore-fathers never dreamed on building of frontire townes and castles.
The meanes to assaile (I meane without battery and troopes of armed
men) and to surprise our houses, encrease daily beyond the meanes of
garding or defending.  Mens wits are generally exasperated and whetted
on that way.  An invasion concerneth all, the defence none but the
rich.  Mine was sufficiently strong, according to the times when it
was made.  I have since added nothing unto it that way; and I would
feare the strength of it should turne against my selfe.  Seeing a
peaceable time will require we shall unfortifie them.  It is dangerous
not to be able to recover them againe, and it is hard for one to be
assured of them.  For concerning intestine broils, your owne servant
may be of that faction you stand in feare of.  And where religion
serveth for a pretence, even alliances and consanguinitie become
mistrustful under colour of justice.  Common rents cannot entertaine
our private garrisons.  They should all be consumed.  We have not
wherewith, nor are wee able to doe it without our apparent ruine, or
more incommodiously and therewithall injuriously without the common
peoples destruction.  The state of my losse should not be much worse.
And if you chance to be a looser, your owne friends are readier to
accuse your improvidence and unhedinesse than to moane you, and excuse
your ignorance and carelesenesse concerning the offices belonging to
your profession.  That so many strongly-garded houses have been lost,
whereass mine continueth still, makes me suspect they were overthrowne
onely because they were so diligently garded.  It is that which
affoordeth a desire and ministreth a pretence to the assailant.  All
gards beare a shew of warre, which if God be so pleased may light upon
me.  But so it is, I will never call for it.  It is my sanctuary or
retreate to rest my selfe from warres.  I endeavour to free this
corner from the publike storme, as I doe another corner in my soule.
Our warre may change forme and multiply and diversifie how and as long
as it list, but for my selfe I never stirre. Amongst so many
barricaded and armed houses, none but my selfe (as farre as I know) of
my qualitie hath merely trusted the protection of his unto the
heavens: {Antonio+} for I never removed neither plate, nor hangings,
nor my evidences.  I will neither feare nor save my selfe by halfes.
If a full acknowledgement purchaseth the; favour of God, it shall last
me for ever unto the end: if not, I have continued long enough to make
my continuance remarkeable and worthy the registring.  What, is not
thirtie yeares a goodly time? {unilateral_disarmament+}

CHAPTER 2.XVI+ OF GLORY+


THERE is both name, and the thing: the name is a voice which noteth
and signifieth the thing: the name is neither part of thing nor of
substance: it is a stranger-piece joyned to the thing and from it.
God who in and by himselfe is all fulnesse, and the type of all
perfection, cannot inwardly be augmented or encreased: yet may his
name be encreased and augmented by the blessing and praise which we
give unto his exteriour workes; which praise and blessing, since we
cannot incorporate into him, forsomuch as no accession of good can be
had unto him, we ascribe it unto his name, which is a part without
him, and the neerest unto him.  And that is the reason why glory and
honour appertaineth to God only. {Antonio+} And there is nothing so
repugnant unto reason as for us to goe about to purchase any for our
selves: for being inwardly needy and defective, and our essence
imperfect and ever wanting amendment, we ought only labour about
that. We are all hollow and empty, and it is not with breath and words
we should fil our selves.  We have need of a more solide substance to
repaire our selves.  An hunger starved man might be thought most
simple rather to provide himselfe of a faire garment then of a good
meales-meat: we must runne to that which most concerneth us.  Gloria
in excelsis Deo, et in terra pax hominibus./1

'Glory be to God on high, and peace on earth amongst men,' as say our
ordinary prayers.  We are in great want of beautie, health, wisdome,
vertue, and such like essentiall parts.  Exteriour ornaments

----- 1 Luke ii. xiv.

may be sought for when we are once provided of necessary things.
Divinitie doth very amply and pertinently treate of this subject, but
I am not very conversant with it.  Chrysippus and Diogenes have beene
the first and most constant authors of the contempt of glory+. And
amongst all sensualities, they said, there was as none so dangerous
nor so much to be avoided as that which commeth unto us by the
approbation of others. {Hotspur+} Verily experience makes us thereby
feele and undergoe many damageable treasons. Nothing so much
empoisoneth princes as flattery+. Nor nothing whereby the wicked
minded gaine so easie credit about them; nor any enticement so fit,
nor pandership so ordinary to corrupt the chastity of women, then to
feed and entertaine them with their praises.  The first enchantment
the Syrens employed to deceive Ulisses is of this nature.

  Deca vers nous, deca, o treslouable Ulisse,

  Et le plus grand honneur dont la Grece fleurisse.

  Turne to us, to us turne, Ulisses thrice-renowned,

  The principall renowne wherewith all Greece is crowned.

  Philosophers said that all the worlds glory deserved not that a man
  of wisdome should so much as stretch forth his finger to acquire it.

  Gloria quantalibet quid erit, si gloria tantum est?/1

  Never so gIorious name,

  What ist, be it but fame?

I say for it alone: for it drawes many commodities after it, by which
it may yeeld it selfe desirable: it purchaseth us good will: it makes
us lesse exposed to others injuries and offences and such like things.
It was also one of the principall degrees of Epicurus: for that
precept of his sect, HIDE THY LIFE, which forbideth men to meddle with
public charges and negotiations, doth also necessarily presuppose that
a man should despise despise glory, which is an approbation the world
makes of those actions we give evidence of.  He that bids us

----- 1 JUVEN.  Sat. vii. 8.

to hide our life and care but for our selves, and would not have us
know of others, would also have us not to be honoured and glorified
thereby. So doth he counsel Idomeneus by no meanes to order his
actions by the vulgar opinion and publike reputation: unlesse it be to
avoide other accidentall in-commodities which the contempt of men
might bring unto him.  Those discourses (are in mine advise) very true
and reasonable: but I wot not how we are double in our selves, which
is the cause that what we beleeve we beleeve it not, and cannot rid
our selves of that which we condemne.  Let us consider the last words
of Epicurus, and which he speaketh as he is dying: they are notable
and worthy such a Philosopher: but yet they have some badge of his
names commendations, and of the humour which by his precepts he had
disavowed.  Behold here a letter which he edited a little before he
yeelded up the ghost. 'Epicurus to Hermachus health and greeting.
Whilst I passe the happy, and even the last day of my life, I write
this, accompanied neverthelesse with such paine in my bladder and
anguish in my entrails, that nothing can be added unto the greatnesse
of it; yet was it recompensed with the pleasure which the remembrance
of my inventions and discourses brought unto my soule.  Now as
requireth the affection which even from the infancy thou bast borne me
and Philosophy, embrace the protection of Metrodorus his children.
Loe here his letter.  And which makes me interpret that the pleasure
which in his soule he saith to feele of his inventions, doth in some
sort respect the reputation which after his death he thereby hoped to
attaine, is the ordinance of his last will and testament, by which he
willeth that Aminomachus and Timocrates his heires should for the
celebration of his birth- day every month of January supply all such
charges as Hermachus should appoint: and also for the expence he might
be at on the twentieth of every moon for the feasting and
entertainment of the Philosophers his familiar friends, who in the
honour of his memorie and of Metrodorus should meete together.
Carneades hath been chiefe of the contrary opinion and hath maintained
that glory was in it selfe to bee desired, even as we embrace our
posthumes for themselves, having neither knowledge nor jovissanee of
them.  This opinion hath not missed to be more commonly followed as
are ordinarily those that fit most and come nearest our inclidations.
Aristotle amongst externall goods yeeldeth the first ranke unto it:
and avoideth as two extreme vices the immoderation either in seeking
or avoiding it.  I beleeve that had we the bookes which Cicero writ
upon this subject, we should heare strange matters of him: for he was
so fond in this passion as had he dared he would (as I thinke) have
easily falne into the excesse that others fell in; which is that even
vertue was not to be desired but for the honour which ever waited on
it

  Paulum sepultae distat inertiae

  Celata virtus./1

  There is but little difference betweene

  Vertue conccal'd, unskilfulnesse unseene.

Which is so false an opinion, as I am vexed it could ever enter a mans
understanding that had the honour to beare the name of a philosopher.
If that were true a man needed not to be vertuous but in publike: and
we should never need to keepe the soules operations in order and rule,
which is the true seate of vertue+, but only so much as they might
come to the knowledge of others.  Doth then nothing else belong unto
it, but craftily to faile, and subtilly to cozen?  If thou knowest a
serpent to be hidden in any place (saith Carneades) to which he by
whose death thou hopest to reape commodity goeth unawares to sit upon,
thou commitiest a wicked act if thou warne him not of it: and so much
the more because thy action should be knowne but to thy
selfe. {integrity+} If we take not the law of weldoing from our
selves: if impunity be justice in us: to how many kindes of treacherie
are we daily to abandon our selves?  That which Sp.  Peduceus did,
faithfully to restore the

----- 1 HOR.  Car. 1. iv.  Od. ix. 29.

riches which C.  Plotius had committed to his only trust and secrecie,
and as my selfe have done often, I thinke not so commendable, as I
would deeme it execrable, if we had not done it.  And I thinke it
beneficiall we should in our daies be mindfull of Publius Sextilius
Rufus his example, whom Cicero accuseth that he had received a great
inheritance against his conscience: not only not repugnant, but
agreeing with the lawes.  And M. Crassus and Q.  Hortensius, who by
reason of their authority and might, having for certaine Quidities
been called by a stranger to the succession of a forged will, that so
he might make his share good: they were pleased not to be partakers of
his forgery, yet refused not to take some profit of it: very closely
had they kept themselves under the countenance of the accusations,
witnesses, and lawes.  Meminerint Deum se habere testem, id est (ut
ego arbitror) mentem suam: 'Let them remember they have God to
witnesse, that is (as I construe it) their owne minde.  Vertue is a
vaine and frivolous thing if it draw her commendation from glory.  In
vaine should we attempt to make her keepe her rancke apart, and so
should we disjoyne it from fortune: for what is more casuall then
reputation+? Profecto, fortuna in omni re dominator: Ea res cuizetas
ex libidine magis quam ex vero celebrat obscuratque: '~Fortune+
governeth in all things, and either advaileth or abaseth them rather
by froward disposition then upright judgement.  To make actions to be
knowne and seene, is the meere work of fortune.  It is chance that
applieth glory unto us, according to her temeritie.  I have often
seene it to goe before desert; yea, and many times to outgoe merit by
very much. He that first bethought himselfe of the resemblance
betweene shadow and glory, did better than he thought of.  They are
exceeding vaine things. It also often goeth before her body, and
sometimes exceeds by much in length. Those who teach nobilitie to
seeke in valour nothing but honour: Quasi non sit honestum quod
nobilitatum non sit: 'As though it were not honest except it were
ennobled:' what gaine they by it?  But to instruct enterprise
according as necessity and occasion offereth it selfe.  And if it be
well noted (in mine advice) it will be found, and experience doth
teach it, that the least blazoned occasions are the most dangerous,
and that in our late home-warres, more good men have perished in
slight and little importing occasions, and in contention about a small
cottage, than in worthy atchievements and honourable places.  Whoso
thinketh his death ill emploied, except it be in some glorious exploit
or famous attempt, in lieu of dignifying his death, he happily
obscureth his life: suffring in the meane time many just and
honor-affoording opportunities to escape, wherein he might and ought
adventure himselfe.  And all just occasions are glorious enough; his
owne conscience publishing them sufficiently to all men.  Gloria
nostra et testimonium conscientiae nostra:/1 'Our glory is the
testimony of our conscience.' He that is not an honest man but by that
which other men know by him, and because he shall the better be
esteemed; being knowne to be so, that will not do well but upon
condition his vertue may come to the knowledge of men; such a one is
no man from whom any great service may be drawne, or good expected.

  Credo ch'il resto di quel verno, cose

  Facesse deqne di tenerne conto,

  Ma fur fin' a quel tempo si nascose,

  Che non e colpa mia s'hor' non le conto,

  Perche Orlando a far' opre virtuose

  Piu ch' a narrle poi sempre era pronto

  Ne mai fu alcun' de li suoi fatti espresso,

  Senon quando hebbe testimonii appresso./2

  I guesse, he of that winter all the rest

  Atchiev'd exploits, whereof to keepe account,

  But they untill that time were so supprest,

  As now my fault 'tis not, them not to count,

  Because Orlando ever was more prest

  To doe+, than tell deeds that might all surmount.

  Nor was there any of his deeds related

  Unlesse some witnesse were associated.


----- 1 2 COR. i. 12; AUG.  Hom. xxxv. 2 ARIOSTO,
Orl. cant. xi. stan. 81.

A man must me to warres for his devoirs sake, and expect this
recompence of it, which cannot faile all worthy actions, how secret
soever; no not to vertuous thoughts: it is the contentment that a well
disposed conscience receiveth in it selfe by well
doing. {virtue_own_reward+} A man must be valiant for himselfe and for
the advantage he hath to have his courage placed in a constant and
assured seate, to withstand all assaults of fortune.

  Virtus repulsae nescia sordidae,

  Intaminatis fulget honoribus:

  Nec sumit aut ponit secures

  Arbitrio popularis aurae./1

  Vertue unskill'd to take repulse that's base,

  In undefiled honors earely shines,

  At the dispose of peoples airy grace

  She signes of honor tak's not, nor resignes.

It is not only for an exterior shew or ostentation that our soule must
play her part, but inwardly within our selves, where no eyes shine but
ours: there it doth shroud us from the feare of death, of sorrowes and
of shame: there it assureth us from the losse of our children, friend,
and fortunes; and when opportunitie is offerd, it also leades us to
the dangers of warre.  Non emoluntento aliquo, sedi psius honestatis
decore:/2 'Not for any advantage, but for the gracefulnes+ of
honestie+ it selfe.' Thls benefit is much greater, and more worthie to
be wished and hoped than honor and glory, which is nought but a
favorable judgment that is made of us.  We are often driven to
empanell and select a jury of twelve men out of a whole countrie to
determine of an acre of land: And the judgement of our inclinations
and actions (the weightiest and hardest matter that is) we referre it
to the idle breath of the vaine voice of the common_sort+ and base
raskalitie, which is the mother of ignorance, of injustice and
inconstancie.  Is it reason to make the life of a wise man depend on
the judgement of fooles? An quidquam stultius, quam quos singulos
contemnas, eos aliquid putare

----- 1 HOR.  Car. 1. iii.  Od. ii. 17. 2 CIC.  Fin. 1. i.

esse universos?/1 'Is there anything more foolish then to thinke that
al together they are oughts, whom every one single you would set at
noughts.  Whosoever aimeth to please them hath never done.  It is a
Butt, that hath neither forme nor holdfast.' Nil tam inaestimabile
est, quam aninti multitudinis: 'Nothing is so incomprehensible to be
just waied, as the minds of the multitude.' Demetrius said merrily of
the common peoples voice, that he made no more reckoning of that which
issued from out his mouth above, then of that which came from a homely
place below; and saith moreover: Ego hoc judico, si quando turpe non
sit, tamen non esse non turpe, quum id a multitudine laudetur:/2 'Thus
I esteem of it, if of it selfe it be not dishonest, yet can it not but
be dishonest, when it is applauded by the many.'  No art, no mildnesse
of spirit might direct our steps to follow so stragling and disordered
a guide.  In this breathie confusion of bruites and frothy Chaos of
reports and of vulgar opinions, which still push us on, no good course
can be established.  Let us not propose so fleeing and so wavering an
end unto our selves.  Let us constantly follow reason: And let the
vulgar approbation follow us that way.  If it please: And as it
depends all on fortune, we have no law to hope for it, rather by any
other way then by that.  Should I not follow a strait path for its
straightnesse, yet would I do it because experience hath taught me
that in the end it is the happiest and most
profitable.{virtue_own_reward+} Dedit hoc providentia hominibus munus
at honesta magis juvarent: ' Mans providence hath given him this gift,
that honest things should more delight and availe him.  The ancient
Sailer said thus to Neptune in a great storme, 'Oh God, thou shalt
save me if thou please, if not, thou shalt lose me; yet will I keep my
helme still fast,' I have in my daies seene a thousand middle,
mungrell and ambiguous men, and whom no man doubted to be more
worldly-wise than my selfe, lose themselves, where I have saved my
selfe.

----- 1 AELIAN.  Var.  Hist. 1. ii. c. 1. 1 CIC.  Fin.  Ben. 1. ii.

  Risi successu posse carere dolos/1

  I smild to see that wily plots

  Might want successe (and leave men sots).

Paulus Emilius going to the glorious expedition of Macedon, advertised
the people of Rome during his absence not to speake of his actions:
for the licence of judgements is an especiall let in great affaires.
Forasmuch as all men have not the constancy of Fabius against common,
contrary and detracting voices: who loved better to have his authority
dismembred by mens vaine fantasies, then not to performe his charge so
well, with favourable and popular applause.  There is a kind of I know
not what naturall delight that man hath to heare himselfe commended,
but wee yeeld too-too much unto it.

  Laudari haud metuam, neque enim mihi cornea fibra est,

  Sed recti finemque extremumque esse recuso

  Euge tuum et belle./2

  {Coriolanus+} Nor feare I to be prais'd, for my guttes are not home,

  But that the utmost end of good should be, I scorne,

  Thy O well said, well done, well plaid.

I care not so much what I am with others, as I respect what I am in my
selfe.  I will bee rich by my selfe and not by borrowing. Strangers
see but external apparances and events: every man can set a good face
upon the matter, when within he is full of care, griefe and
infirmities. They see not my heart when they looke upon my outward
countenance.  There is great reason the hypocrisie that is found in
war should be discovered: for, what is more easie in a man of practise
then to flinch in dangers and to counterfeit a gallant and a boaster+
when his heart is full of faintnesse and ready to droope for feare?
There are so many waies to shunne occasions for a man to hazard
himselfe in particular, that we shall have deceived the world a
thousand times before we need engage our selves into any perillous
attempt; and even when wee find our

----- 1 OVID.  Epist.  Penel. v. 18. 2 PERS.  Sat. i. 47.

selves entangled in it, wee shall not want skill how to cloake our
sport with a good face, searne countenance, and bold speeches;
although our heart doe quake within us. 'And hee that had the use of
the Platonicall Ring,{Gyges+} whose vertue was to make him invisible
that wore it upon his finger, if it were turned toward the flat of the
hand; many would hide themselves when they should most make shewe of
their worth, and would be sorie to be placed in so honourable a place
where necessity may be their warrant of safetie.

  Falsus honor iuvat, et mendax infamia terra

  Quem, nisi mendosum et mendacem/1

  False honour tickles; false defame affrights,

  Whom, but the faulty, and false-fierd sprights?

See how all those judgements that men make of outward apparences are
wonderfully uncertaine and doubtfull, and there is no man so sure a
testimony, as every man is to himselfe: How many horse-boye's have we
in them as parteners and companions of our glory?  He that keepes his
stand in an open trench, what doth he more, but divers poore pioners
doe as much before him, who open the way for him, and with their
bodies shelter him for poore sixpence a day, and happily for lesse?
{peasant_stand_up+}

  ----- non quicguid turbida Roma

  Elevet, accedas, examenque improbum in illa


  Castiges trutina, nec te quaesiveris extra./2

  If troublous Rome set ought at nought, make you not one,

  Nor chastise you unjust examination

  In balance of their lode:

  Nor seeke your selfe abrode.

We call that a magnifying of our name, to extend and diperse the same
in many mouthes; we will have it to be received in good part, and that
its increase redound to his benefit: this is al that is most excusable
in its desseigne.  But the infirmity of its excesse proceeds so farre
that many labour to have the world speake of them, howsoever it be.
Trogus Pompeius

----- 1 HOR. 1. i.  Epist. xvi. 89. 2 PERS.  Sat. i. 5.

saith of Herostratus, and Titus Livius of Manlius Capitolinus, that
they were more desirous of great then good reputation+. It is an
ordinary fault; we endevour more that men should speake of us, then
how and what they speake, and it sufficeth us that our name run in
mens mouthes, in what manner soever.  It seemeth that to be knowen is
in some sort to have life and continuance in other mens keeping.  As
for me I hold that I am but in my selfe; and of this other life of
mine which consisteth in the knowledge of my friends, being simply and
barely considered in my self well I wot, I neither feele fruite or
jovissance of it, but by the vanitie of fantasticall opinion.  And
when I shall be dead, I shall much lesse have a feeling of it: And
shall absolutely lose the use of true utilities which sometimes
accidentally follow it: I shall have no more fastnesse to take hold on
reputation, nor whereby it may either concerne or come unto mee. For,
to expect my name should receive it, First, I have no name that is
sufficiently mine: of two I have, the one is common to all my race,
yea and also to others.  There is a family at Paris and another at
Montpellier called Montaigne, another in Britany, and one in
Xaintonge, surnamed de la Montaigne.  The removing of one onely
syllable may so confound our webbe, as I shall have a share in their
glory, and they perhaps a part of my shame. And my Ancestors have
heretofore beene surnamed Higham or Eyquem, a surname which also
belongs to a house well knowen in England.  As for my other name, it
is any bodies that shall have a minde to it.  So shall I happily
honour a Porter in my stead.  And suppose I had a particular marke or
badge for my selfe, what can it marke when I am no more extant?  May
it desseigne or favour inanity?

  -----nunc levior cippus non imprimit ossa?

  Laudat posteritas; nunc non e manibus illis,


  Nunc non e tumulo fortunataque favilla

  Nascuntur violae?/1


----- 1 PERS.  Sat. i. 37.

  Doth not the grave-stone on such bones sit light?

  Posterity applaudes: from such a spright,

  From such a tombe, from ashes blessed so,

  Shall there not Violets (in cart-lodes) grow?

But of this I have spoken elsewhere.  As for the rest, in a whole
battell, where ten thousand are either maymed or slaine, there are not
peradventure fifteene that shall be much spoken off.  It must be some
eminent greatness or important consequence that fortune hath joyned
unto it to make a private action prevaile, not of a meane shot alone,
but of a chieftaine: for to kill a man or two or tenne; for one to
present himselfe undantedly to death, is indeed something to every one
of us in particular: for a mans free-hold goes on it: But in regarde
of the world they are such ordinary things, so many are daily seene,
and so sundry alike must concurre together to produce a notable
effect, that wee can looke for no particular commendation by
them. {warre+}

  ----- casus multis hic cognitus, ac iam
  
  Tritus, et e medio fortuno ductus acervo./1

 
  This case is knowne of many, worne with nothing,

  Drawne from the midle heape of fortunes doting.


Of so many thousands of worthie-valiant men, which fifteene hundred
yeares since have died in France with their weapons in hand, not one
hundred have come to our knowledge: The memory not onely of the
Generals and Leaders, but also of the battels and victories lieth now
low-buried in oblivion.  The fortunes of more than halfe the world,
for want of a register, stirre not from their place, and vanish away
without continuance.  Had I all the unknowne events in my possession,
I am perswaded I might easily supplant those that are knowne in all
kindes of examples. What, of the Romanes themselves and of the
Graecians, amongst so many writers and testimonies, and so infinit
rare exploites and matchles examples, how are so few of them come to
our notice?

----- 1 JUVEN.  Sat. xiii. 9.

  Ad nos vix tenuis famae perlabitur aura,/1

  Scarcely to us doth passe

  Fames thin breath, how it was.


It shall be much, if a hundred yeares hence the civill warres which
lately we have had in France, be but remembred in grosse. The
Lacedemonians, as they were going to their battles, were wont to
sacrifice unto the Muses to the end their deedes might be well written
and worthily registred; deeming it a divine favor and unusuall grace,
that noble actions might finde testimonies able to give them life and
memory.  Thinke we that at every shot that hits us or at every
dangerous attempt we runne into to have a clarke present to enrole it:
and besides, it may be that an hundred clarkes shall write them, whose
commentaries shall not continue three daies and shall never come to
anybodys sight.  We have but a thousandth part of ancient writings: It
is Fortune, which according to her favor gives them either shorter or
longer life; and what we have, we may lawfully doubt of, whether it be
the worse, since we never saw the rest.  Histories are not written
upon every small trifle: It is requisite that a man have beene
conqueror of an Empire or of a Kingdome; a man must have obtained two
and fiftie set battles, and ever with a lesser number of men, as
Caesar did. Tenne thousand good-fellowes, and many great captaines
have died most valiantly and coragiously in pursuite of her, whose
names have continued no longer then their wives and children lived:

  ----- quos fama obscura recondit./2

  Whom fame obscure before

  Layes up in unknowne store.



Even of those whom we see to doe excellently well, if they have but
once continued so three months, or so many yeares, there is no more
speech of them then if they had never bin.  Whosoever shall in due

----- 1 VIRG.  AEn. 1. vii. 646. 2 Ib. 1. v. 292.

measure proportion and impartially consider, of what kinde of people,
and of what deedes the glory is kept in the memory of bookes, he shall
finde there are few actions and very few persons that may justly
pretend any right in them.  How many vertuous men have we seene to
survive their owne reputation, who even in their presence have seen
the honor and glorie which in their young daies they had right-justly
purchased, to be cleane extinguished?  And doe we for three yeares of
this fantasticall and imaginarie life lose and foregoe our right and
essentiall life, and engage our selves in a perpetuall death?  The
wiser sort propose a right-fairer and much more just end unto
themselves, to so urgent and weighty an enterprise. Recte facti,
fecisse merces est: Officii fructi, ipsum officium est:/1{Major+} 'The
reward of well-doing is the doing, and the fruit of our duty is our
duty.'  It might peradventure be excusable in a Painter or other
artificer, or also in a Rhetorician or Gramarian, by his labours to
endevor to purchase a name: But the actions of vertue are themselves
too-too noble to seeke any other reward then by their own worth and
merit, and especially to seeke it in the vanity of mans judgement.  If
this false-fond opinion doe notwithstanding serve and stead a common
wealth to hold men to their dutie: if the people be thereby stirred up
to vertue: if Princes be any way touched to see the world blesse and
commend the memorie of Trajan, and detest the remembrance of Nero: if
that doth moove them to see the name of that arch-villanie, heretofore
so dreadfull and so much redoubted of all, so boldly cursed and so
freely outraged by the first scholer that undertakes him: Let it
hardly be increased, and let us (as much as in us lieth) still foster
the same amongst ourselves.  And Platoe employing all meanes to make
his Citizens vertuous, doth also perswade them not to contemne the
peoples good estimation. And saith that through some divine
inspiration it commeth to passe that even the wicked know often, as
well by word as by opinion, how to distinguish justly

----- 1 SEN.  Epist. lxxxi.

the good from the bad.  This man, together with his master, are
wonderfull and bold workmen to joyne divine operations and revelations
wheresoever humane force faileth.  And therefore did perventure Timon
(deeming thereby to wrong him) surname him the great forger of
miracles. Vt tragici poetae confugiunt ad Deum, cum explicare
argumenti exitum non possunt./1 'As Poets that write Tragedies have
recourse to some God when they cannot unfold the end of their
argument.' Since men by reason of their insufliciencie cannot well pay
themselves with good lawfull coine, let them also employ false money.
This meane hath beene practised by all the law-givers: And there is no
common wealth where there is not some mixture either of ceremonious
vanity or of false opinion, which as a restraint serveth to keepe the
people in awe and dutie.  It is therefore that most of them have such
fabulous grounds and trifling beginnings, and enriched with
supernaturall mysteries.  It is that which hath given credit unto
adulterate and unlawfull religions, and hath induced men of
understanding to favour and countenance them.  And therefore did Noma
and Sertorius, to make their men have a better beliefe, feed them with
this foppery: the one, that the Nimph Egeria, the other that his white
Hinde, brought him all the councels he tooke from the Gods.  And the
same authority which Numa gave his lawes under the title of this
Goddesses patronage, Zoroaster, Law-giver to the Bactrians and
Persians, gave it to his, under the name of the God
Oromazis. Trismegistus, of the AFgyptians, of Mercury: Zamolzie, of
the Scithians, of Vesta: Charondas, of the Chalcedonians, of Saturne:
Minos, of the Candiots, of Jupiter: Lycurgus, of the Lacedemonians, of
Apollo: Dracon and Solon, of the Athenians, of Minerva.  And every
common wealth hath a God to her chiefe: al others falsly, but that
truly which Moses instituted for the people of Jewry descended from
Aegypt.  The Bedoins religion (as saith the Lord of Jouinvile) held
among other things that his soule which among them all died

----- 1 CIC.  Nat.  Deor. 1. i.

for his Prince went directly into another more happy body much fairer
and stronger than the first: by means whereof they much more willingly
hazarded their lives for his sake.

  In ferrum mens prona viris animaeque capaces

  Mortis: et ignavum est rediturae parcere vitae./1

  Those men sword minded, can death entertaine,

  Thinke base to spare the life that turnes againe.

Loe here, although very vaine, a most needfull doctrine and profitable
beliefe.  Everie Nation hath store of such examples in it selfe.  But
this subject would require a severall discourse.  Yet to say a word
more concerning my former purpose: I do not counsell Ladies any longer
to call their duty honour: vt enim consuetudo loquitur, id solum
dicitur honestum, quod est populari fama gloriosum:/2 'For as custome
speakes, that only is called honest which is glorious by popular
report.' Their duty is the marke; their honour but the barke of it.
Nor doe I perswade them to give us this excuse of their refusall in
payment; for I suppose their intentions, their desire, and their will,
which are parts wherein honour can see nothing, forasmuch as nothing
appeareth outwardly, there are yet more ordered then the effects.

  Quae, quia non liceat, non facit, illa facit./3

  She doth it, though she do it not

  Because she may not doe't (Got wot).


The offence both toward God and in conscience would be as great to
desire it as to effect the same.  Besides, they are in themselves
actions secret and hid; it might easily be, they would steale some one
from others knowledge, whence honour dependeth, had they no other
respect to their duty and affection which they beare unto chastity, in
regard of it selfe.  Each honorable person chuseth rather to lose his
honour than to forgoe his conscience.

----- 1 LUCAN. 1. i. 461. 2 CIC.  Fin. 1. ii. 3 OVID.  Amor. 1. iii.
El. iv. 4.

CHAPTER 2.XVII+ OF PRESUMPTION

THERE is another kind of glory, which is an over-good opinion we
conceive of our worth.  It is an inconsiderate affection, wherewith
wee cherish our selves, which presents us unto our selves other then
we are.  As an amorous passion addeth beauties and lendeth graces to
the subject it embraceth, and maketh such as are therewith possessed,
with a troubled conceit and distracted judgmement, to deeme what they
love, and finde what they affect, to bee other, and seeme more
perfect, then in trueth it is.  Yet would I not have a man, for feare
of offending in that point, to misacknowledge himselfe, nor thinke to
bee lesse then hee is: A true judgement should wholly and in every
respect mainetaine his right.  It is reason, that as in other things,
so in this subject he see what truth presenteth unto him. If he be
Caesar, let him boldly deeme himselfe the greatest Captaine of the
world.  We are nought but ceremonie: ceremonie doth transport us, and
wee leave the substance of things; we hold-fast by the boughs, and
leave the trunke or body.  Wee have taught ladies to blush, onely by
hearing that named which they nothing feare to doe.  Wee dare not call
our members by their proper names, and feare not to employ them in all
kind of dissolutenese. Ceremonie forbids us by words to expresse
lawfull and naturall things; and we beleeve it.  Reason willeth us to
doe no bad or unlawfull things, and no man giveth credit unto it.
Here I find my selfe entangled in the lawes of Ceremonie, for it
neither allowes a man to speake ill or good of
himselfe. {PlainDealer+} Therefore will wee leave her at this
time. Those whom fortune (whether we shall name her good or bad) hath
made to passe their life in some eminent or conspicuous degree, may by
their publike actions witnesse what they are; but those whom she never
emploied but in base things, and of whom no man shall ever speake,
except themselves doe it, they are excusable if they dare speake of
themselves to such as have interest in their acquaintance, after the
example of Lucillus

  Ille velut fidis arcana sodalibus olim

  Credebat libris: neque si male cesserat, usquam

  Decurrens alio, neque si bene: quo fit, ut omnis Votiva pateat
  veluti descripta tabella

  Vita senis./1

  o his booke, as to his trusty friend

  His secrets, nor did he to other refuge bend,

  How ever well, or ill, with him his fortune went.

  Hence is it, all the life is seene the old man spent,

  As it were in a Table noted,.

  Which were unto some God devoted.

This man committed his actions and imaginations to his paper, and as
he felt, so he pourtraied himselfe.  Nec id Rutilio et Scauro citra
fidem, aut obtrectationi fuit:/2 'Nor was that without credit, or any
imputation to Rutilius or Scaurus.' I remember then, that even from my
tenderest infancy, some noted in me a kind of I know not what fashion
in carrying of my body and gestures, witnessing a certaine vaine and
foolish fiercenesse.  This I will first say of it, that it is not
inconvenient to have conditions so peculiar, and propensions so
incorporated in us, that we have no meane to feele, or way to know
them.  And of such naturall inclinations, unknowne to us, and without
our consent, the body doth easily retaine some signe or impression.
It was an affectation witting of his beauty, which made Alexander to
bend his head a little on one side, and Alcibiades, his speech
somewhat effeminate and lisping: Julius Caesar was wont to scratch his
head with one finger, which is the countenance of a man surcharged

----- 1 HOR.  Ser. 1. ii.  Sat. i. 30. 2 CORN.  TACIT.  Vit.  Jul.
Agric.

with painefull imaginations: and Cicero (as I remember) had gotten a
custome to wryth his nose, which signifieth a naturall scoffer.  Such
motions may unawares and imperceptibly possesse us.  Others there be
which are artificiall, whereof I will not speake.  As salutations,
reverences, or conges, by which some doe often purchase the honour
(but wrongfully) to be humble, lowly, and courteous: a man may be
humble through glory.  I am very prodigall of cappings, namely in
Summer, and I never receive any from what quality of men soever, but I
give them as good and as many as they bring, except be be some servant
of mine.  I wish that some Princes whom I know would be more sparing
and in partiall dispencers of them, for, being so indiscreetly
employed, they have no force at all: If they be without regard, then
are they without effect.  Amongst disordered countenances, let us not
forget the sterne looke of Constantius the Emperour, who in publike
held ever his head bolt-upright, without turning or bending the same
on any side, no not so much as to looke on them that saluted him
sideling, holding his body so fixt and unmoveable, that let his coche
shake never so much, he kept still up-right: he durst never spit nor
wipe his nose nor drie his face before. the people.  I wot not whether
those gestures which were noted in me were of this first condition,
and whether in truth I had any secret propension to this fault, as it
may well be: and I cannot answer for the motions of my body.  But
concerning those of the soule, I will here ingenuously confesse what I
thinke of them.  There are two parts in this glory: which is to say,
for a man to esteeme himselfe overmuch, the other, not sufficiently to
esteeme of others.  For the one, first me thinks these considerations
ought somewhat to be accompted of.  I feele my selfe surcharged with
one errour of the mind, which both as bad, and much more as
importunate, I utterly dislike.  I endevour to correct it; but I
cannot displace it.  It is, because I abate the just value of those
things which I possesse; and enhance the worth of things by how much
they are more strange, absent and not mine owne.  This humor extends
it selfe very farre, as doth the prerogative of the authority,
wherewith husbands looke upon their owne wives with a vicious
disdaine, and many fathers upon their children: so doe I, and betweene
two like workes would I ever weigh against mine.  Not so much that the
jealousie of my preferment, and amendment troubleth my judgement, and
hindereth me from pleasing my selfe, as that mastery her self begets a
contempt of that which a man possesseth and oweth.  Policies, far
customes and tongues flatter me; and I perceive the Latine ton gue by
the favour of her dignity to deceive me, beyond what belongs unto her,
as children and the vulgar sort.  My neighbours economie; his house,
and his horse, though but of equall value, is more worth then mine by
how much more it is not mine owne.  Besides, because I am most
ignorant in mine owne matters, I admire the assurance, and wonder at
the promise that every man hath of himselfe: whereas there is almost
nothing that I wot I know, nor that I dare warrant my selfe to be able
to doe.  I have not my faculties in proposition or by estate, and am
not instructed in them but after the effect; as doubtfull of mine owne
strength, as uncertaine of anothers force. Whence it followeth, if
commendably I chance upon any one piece of worke, I rather impute it
to my fortune+, then ascribe it to mine industry; forasmucb as I
designe them all to hazard and in feare.  Likewise I have this in
generall, that of all the opinions which Antiquity hath had of men in
gross, those which I most willingly embrace, and whereon I take most
hold, are such as most vilifie, condemne, and annihilate us. {Yahoo+}
Me thinks Philosophy hath never better cardes to shew then when she
checketh our presumption, and crosseth our vanity; when in good sooth
she acknowledgeth her irresolution, her weaknesse and her ignorance.
Me seemeth the over good conceit and selfe-weening opinion man hath of
himselfe, is the nurse-mother of the falsest opinions, both publike
and particular.  Those which a cocke-horse will pearch themselves upon
the Epicicle of Mercury and see so farre into heaven, they even pull
out my teeth.  For in the study which I professe, the subject whereof
is Man, {proper_study+} finding so extreme a inextricable a labyrinth
of difficulties, one upon the necke of another, so great diversitie,
and so much uncertaintie, yea even in the school of wisedome it selfe:
you may imagine since those men could never be resolved of the
knowledge of themselves and of their owne condition, which is
continually before their eyes, which is ever within them; since they
know not how that moveth which themselves cause to move, nor how to
set forth the springs, and decipher the wards, which themselves hold
and handle, how should I thinke of the true cause of the flux and
reflux of the river Nilus?  The curiosity to know things hath beene
given to men (as saith the holy Scripture for a scourge.  But to come
to my particular, it is very hard (mee seemeth) that some other
regardeth him selfe lesse, yea and some other esteemeth me lesse than
I esteeme my selfe.  I accompt my selfe of the common+ sort, except in
that I deeme myselfe guiltie of the basest, and culpable most popular
defects: but not disavowed nor excused. {low_esteem+} And I only prise
my selfe wherein I know my worth.  If any glory be in me, it is but
superficially infused into me; by the treason of my complexion: and
hath no solide body appearing to the sight of my judgement.  I am but
sprinckled over, but not throughly dyed.  For in truth, touching the
effects of the spirit in what manner soever, there never came any
thing from me that contented me.  And others approbation is no currant
payment for me.  My judgement is tender and hard, especially in mine
owne behalf.  I feele my self to waver and bend through weaknesse: I
have nothing of mine owne to satisfie my judgement. My sight is
indifferently cleare and regular; but if I take any serious worke in
hand, it is troubled and dimmed: as I perceive most evidently in
poesie: I love it exceedingly: I have some insight or knowledge in
other mens labours, but in truth I play the novice when I set my hand
unto it: then can I not abide my selfe.  A man may play the foole
every where else, but not in poesie:

  -----mediocribus esse poetis

  Non dii, non homines, non concessere, columnae,/1

  Nor Gods, nor men, nor pillers gave the graunt,

  That Poets in a meane, should meanely chaunt.

  I would to God this sentence were found in the front of our printers
  or stationers shops, to hinder the entrance of so many bald-rimers.


  -----verum

  Nil securius est malo Poeta./2


  Nothing securer may he had,

  Then is a Poet bold and bad.

Why have we no such people?  Dionysius the father esteemed nothing in
himselfe so much as his poesie.  In the times of the Olimpike games,
with chariots exceeding all other in magnificence, he also sent poets
and musitians to present his verses, with tents and pavillions gilt
and most suinptuously tapistried.  When they first beganne to rehearse
them, the favour and excellencie of the pronunciation did greatly
allure the peoples attention: but when they beganne to consider the
fondnesse of the composition, they fell as soone to contemne them: and
being more and more exasperated, fell furiously into an uproare; and
headlong ranne in most spitefull manner to teare and cast downe all
his pavillions.  And forasmuch as his rich chariots did no good at all
in their course, and the ship which carried his men, returning
homeward, missed the shore of Sicilie, and was by violent stormes
driven and spilt upon the coast of Tarentum, they certainely beleeved
the wrath of the Gods to have beene the cause of it, as being greatly
offended both against him and his vile and wicked poeme: yea and the
mariners themselves that escaped the shipwracke did much second the
peoples opinion: to which the oracle that foretold his

----- 1 HOR.  Art.  Poet. 372. 2 MART. 1. xii.  Epig. lxiv.

death seemed in some sort to subscribe: which implied that Dionysius
should be neare his end, at what time he had vanquished those that
should be of more worth than himselfe; which he interpreted to be the
Carthaginians, who exceeded him in might.  And having at any time an
occasion to fight with them, that that he might not incur the meaning
of his prediction, he would often temper and avoide the victorie.  But
he mis-understood the matter, for God observed the the time of
advantage, when as through partiall fatvour and injustice he obtained
the victory over the tragicall poets of Athens, who were much better
than he was, where he caused, in contention of them, his tragedie,
entitled the Leneiens, to be publikely acted.  After which usurped
victorie, be presently deceased: and partly through the excessive joy
he thereby conceived.  What I finde excusable in mine is not of it
selfe and according to truth: but in comparison of other compositions,
worse then mine, to which I see some credit given.  I envie the good
the happe of those which can applaude and gratifie themselves by their
owne labours; for it is an easie matter for one to please himselfe,
since he drawes his pleasure from himselfe: especially if one be
somewhat constant in his owne wilfulnesse.  I know a poetaster, gainst
whom both weake and strong, in company and at home, both heaven and
earth, affirme and say he hath no skill or judgement in poesie, who
for all that is nothing dismaied, nor will not abate one jote of that
measure whereunto he hath fitted himselfe; but is ever beginning
againe, ever consulting anew, and alwaies persisting; by so much the
more fixed in his opinion by how much the more it concerneth him
alone, and he only is to maintaine it.  My compositions are so farre
from applauding me, that as many times as I looke them over, so often
am I vexed at them.

  Cum relego, scripsisse pudet, quia plurima cerno,

  Me quoque qui feci judice, digna lini./1


----- 1 OVID.  Pont. 1. i. c. vi. 15.

  When I re-read, I shame I write; for much I see,

  My selfe, who made them, being judge, blotted to be.

I have ever an idea in my mind which presents me with a better forme
then that I have alreadie framed; but I can neither lay hold on it nor
effect it.  Yet is that idea but of the meaner stamp. I thereby
conclude that the productions of those rich and great mindes of former
ages are farre beyond the extreame extention of my wish and
imagination. Their compositions doe not only satisfie and fill me, but
they astonish and wrap me into admiration.  I judge of their beauty, I
see it, if not to the end, at least so farre as it is impossible for
me to aspire unto it.  Whatsoever I undertake (as Plutarke saith of
one) I owe a sacrifice to the Graces, hoping thereby to gaine their
favour.

  ----- si quid enim placet,

Si quid dulce hominum, sensibus influit.



  Debentur lepidis omnia gratus.

  If ought do please, if any sweet

  The sense of men with pleasures greet,

  To thank the Graces it is meet.


They altogether forsake me: what I doe, it is but bunglingly, and
wants both polishing and beauty.  I can rate them at no higher value
then they are worth.  My workmanship addeth no grace unto the matter.
And that's the reason I must have it strong, with good holdfast, and
shining of it selfe, If I chance to seize on any popular or more gay,
it is to follow me, who love not a ceremonious prudence and gloomy
wisedome, as doth the world; and to glad my selfe, not my stile, who
would rather have it grave and severe; if at least I may call that a
stile which is formelesse and abrupt speech; a popular gibrish, and a
proceeding without definition, without partition, and sans conclusion,
troubled as that of Amasanius and Rabirius.  I am neither pleased, nor
glad, nor tickled.  The best tale in the world comming into my hands
becomes withered and tarnished.{Kent+} {PlainDealer+} I cannot speake
but in good earnest, and am altogether barren of that facility which I
see in many of my companions, to entertaine commers, to keep a whole
troupe in talk, to ammuse a princes eares with all manner of
discourses and never to be weary, and never to want matter, by reason
of the graces they have in applying their first approches, and fitting
them to the humour and capacity of those they have to doe withall.
Princes love not greatly serious and long discourses, nor I to tell
tales.  The first and easiest reasons (which are commonly the best
taken I can neither employ nor make use of them. I am an ill orator to
the common sort.  I speake the utmost I know of all matters. {Kent+}
Cicero thinks, in discourses of philosophy, the exordium to be the
hardest part: if it be so, I wisely lay hold on the conclusion. Yet
should a man know how to turne his strings to all aires: and the
sharpest comes ever last in play..  There is at last as much
perfection in raising up an empty as to uphold a weighty thing: a man
must sometimes handle matters but superficially, and at other times
dive into them.  I wot well that most men keep themselves on this low
stage because they conceive not of things but by the outward
shew. {Kent+} I also know that the greatest clarkes, yea Xenophon and
Plato, are often seene to yeeld to this low and popular fashion, in
speaking of matters, upholding it with those graces which they never
want.  As for the rest, my language hath neither facility nor fluency
in it, but is harsh and sharpe, having free and unsinnowy
dispositions.{PlainDealer+} And so it liketh me, if not by my
judgement, yet by my inclination. But yet I perceive that sometimes I
wade too farre into it, and that forcing my selfe to avoide art and
affectation, I fall into it another way. {PlainDealer+}

  ----- brevis esse labore:

  Obscurus fio./1


  To be short labour I?

  I darker grow thereby.

Plato saith, that either long or short are not properties that either
diminish or give price unto speech.  If I should undertake to follow
this other smoothe, even and regular stile, I should never attains
unto it.  And

----- 1 HOR.  Art.  Poet. 25.

although the cadences and breakings of Salust doe best agree with my
humour, yet do I finds Caesar both greater and lesse easie to be
represented. And if my inclination doth rather carrie mee to the
imitation of Senecaes stile, I omit not to esteeme Plutarke much more.
As well in silence as in speech, I am simply my naturall forme, whence
happily ensueth that I am more in speaking than in writing.  The
motions and actions of the body give life unto words, namely, in them
that move roundly and without affectation, as I doe, and that will be
earnest. {PlainDealer+} Behaviour, the face, the voice, the gowne, and
the place, may somewhat endeare those things which in themselves are
but meane, as pratling.  Messala complaineth in Tacitus of certaine
strait garments used in his time, and discommendeth the fashion of the
benches whereon the Orators were to speak, saying they weakened their
eloquence.  My French tongue is corrupted both in the pronunciation
and elsewhere by the barbarisme of my country.  I never saw men of
these hither-countries that did not evidently taste of his
home-speech, and who often did not wound those caree that are purely
French.  Yet it is not because I am so cunning in my Perigordin: for I
have no more use of it than of the Dutch, nor doe I greatly care.  It
is a language (as are many others round about me) like to that of
Poitou, Xaintonge, Angoulesme, Limosin, and Auvergne, squattering,
dragling, and filthie.  There is about us, towards the mountaines, a
Gascoine tongue, which I much commend and like, sinnowie, pithie,
short, significant, and in truth man-like and military; {PlainDealer+}
more than any other I understand.  As compendious, powerfull, and
pertinent as the French is gracious, delicate, and copious.  As for
the Latine, which was given me for my mother-tongue, by reason of
discontinuance, I have so lost the promptitude, of it, as I cannot
well make use of it in speech, and scarcely in writing, in which I
have heretofore beene so ready, that I was called a master in it.  Loe
heere my little sufficiencie in that behalfe. Beauty is a part of
great commendation in the commerce and societie of men.  It is the
chiefe meane of reconciliation betweene one and other.  Nor is there
any man so barbarous and so hard-hearted, that in some sort feeleth
not himselfe strucken with her sweetnes.  The body hath a great part
in our being, and therein keepes a speciall rancke. For his structure
and composition are worthy due consideration.  Such as goe about to
sunder our two principall parts, are much to blame; they ought rather
to be coupled and joyned fast together.  The soule must be enjoyned
not to retire to her selfe her quarter, nor to entertaine her selfe
apart, nor to despise and leave the body (which she cannot well doe,
except it be by some counterfeited, apish tricke) but ought so combine
and cling fast unto him, to embrace, to cherish, assist, correct,
perswade, and advise him, and if hee chance to sway or stray, then to
leade and direct him: In fine, she should wed and serve him instead of
a husband, that so their effects may not seeme contrary and divers,
but agreeing and uniforme.  Christians have a particular instruction
concerning this bond, for they know that Gods justice alloweth this
society, and embraceth this conjunction of the body and soule, yea so
farre as to make the body capable of everlasting rewards.  And that
God beholds the whole man to worke, and will have him entirely to
receive either the punishment or the recompence, according to his
demerits.  The Peripatetike Sect (of all Sects the most sociable)
attributeth this onely care unto wisdome, in common to procure and
provide the good of these two associated parts: and declareth other
sects to have partialized overmuch, because they had given themselves
to the full consideration of this commixture; this one for the body,
this other for the soule, with one like error and oversight, and had
mistaken their subject, which is man; {proper_study+} and their guide,
which in generall they avouched to be Nature.  The first distinction
that hath beene amongst men, and the first consideration that gave
preheminences to some over others, it is very likely it was the
advantage of beauty.

  ----- agros divisere atque dedere

  Pro facie cuiusque et viribus ingenioque:


  Nam facies multum valuit virisque vigebant./1

  They lands divided, and to each man shared

  As was his face, his strength, his wit compared,

  For face and strength were then

  Much priz'd amongst men.

I am of a stature somewhat under the meane.  This default hath not
only uncomlinesse in it, but also incommoditie: Yea even in those
which have charge and commandement over others; for the authoritie
which a faire presence and corporall majestic endoweth a man withal is
wanting.  Caius Marius did not willingly admit any Souldiers in his
bands that were not six foot high.  The Courtier hath reason to
require all ordinary stature in the gentleman he frameth, rather than
any other: and to avoid all strangenesse that may make him to be
pointed at.  But if he misse of this mediocritie, to chuse that he
rather offend in lownes than in tallnes. I would not doe it in a
militarie man.  Little men, saith Aristotle, are indeed pretty, but
not beauteous, nor goodly; and in greatnes is a great soule knowne as
is beauty in a great and high body.  The Ethiopians and Indians, saith
he, in chusing of their Kings and Magistrates, had an especiall regard
to the beautie and tallnes of the persons.  They had reason, for it
breedeth an awfull respect in those that follow him, and a kinde of
feare in his enemies, to see a goodly, tall, and handsome man march as
chiefe and generall in the head of any armie, or front of a troupe:

  Ipse inter primos praestanti corpore Turnus

  Vertitur, arma tenens, et toto vertice suprit est./2

  Turnus, a goodly man, mongst them that led,

  Stood arm'd, then all they higher by the head.


Our great, divine, and heavenly King, all whose circumstances ought
with much care, religion, and reverence, to be noted and observed,
hath not refused the bodies commendation. Speciosus forma prae filiis

----- 1 LUCR. 1. v. 11, 20. 2 VIRG.  AEn. 1. vii. 725.

hominum:/1 'In favor beautiful above the sonnes of men. And Plato
wisheth beautie to be joyned unto temperance and fortitude in the
preservers of his Commonwealth.' Is it not a great spite, if being
amongst your owne servants, a stranger commeth to yourselfe to ask you
where your Lord or Master is?  And that you have nothing but the
remainder of a capping, which is as well put off to your Barber, or to
your Secretarie? As it happened to poore Philopoemen, who having left
his company behind, and comming alone into a house where he was
expresly looked for, his hostess, who knew him not, and saw him to be
so il-favored a fellow, employed him to help her maides draw water,
and to mend the fire for the service of Philopoemen.  The gentlemen of
his traine being come and finding him so busily at work (for he failed
not to fulfil his hostesses commandement, enquired of him what he did,
who answered,' I pay the penaltie of my unhandsomnesse. Other beauties
are for women.  The beautie of a handsome comely tallnesse is the only
beautie of men.  Where lownesse and littlenesse is, neither the
largenesse nor roundnesse of a forehead, nor the whitenesse nor
lovelinesse of the eyes, nor the pretty fashion of a nose, nor the
slendernes of the eare, littlenesse of the mouth, order and whitenesse
of teeth, smooth thicknesse of a beard, browne like a chesse-nut,
well-curled and upstanding haire, just proportion of the head,
freshnes of colour, the cheereful aspect of a pleasing face, the
sweet-smelling of a body, nor the well decorated composition of all
limmes, can make a handsome beauteous man.  As for me, I am of a
strong and well compacted stature, my face is not fat but full, my
complexion betweene joviall and melancholy, indifferently sanguine and
hot.

  Vnde rigent setis mihi crura, et sector villis:/2

  Whereby my legs and brest,

  With rough haire are opprest.


----- 1 Ps. xlv. 3. 2 MART. 1. vi.  Epig. lvi. 1.

My health is blith and lustie, though well-stroken in age, seldome
troubled with diseases: Such I was, for I am now engaged in the
approaches of age, having long since past over forty yeares. {usthem+}

  -----minutatim vires et robur adultum

  Frangit, et in partem pejorem liquitur aetas./1


  By little and a little age breakes strength,

  To worse and worse declining melts at length.

  What hereafter I shall be will be but half a being. I shall be no
  more my selfe.  I daily escape, and still steale my selfe from my
  selfe:

  Singula de nobis anni praedantur euntes./2

  Yeares as they passe away,

  Of all our things make prey.

Of addressing, dexteritie, and disposition, I never had any, yet am I
the son of a well disposed father, and of so blithe and merry a
disposition, that it continued with him even to his extreamest age.
He seldome found any man of his condition, and that could match him in
all exercises of the body; as I have found few that have not out-gone
me, except it were in running, wherein I was of the middle sort.  As
for musicke, were it either in voice, which I have most harsh, and
very unapt, or in instruments, I could never be taught any part of it.
As for dancing, playing at tennis, or wrestling, I could never attaine
to any indifferent sufficiencie, but none at all in swimming, in
fencing, in vaulting, or in leaping.  My hands are so stiffe and
nummie, that I can hardly write for my selfe, so that what I have once
scribled, I had rather frame it anew than take the paines to correct
it; and I reade but little better. I perceive how the auditorie
censureth me; otherwise I am no bad clarke. I cannot very wel close up
a letter, nor could I ever make a pen.  I was never good carver at the
table. {diffidence+} I could never make readie nor arme a

----- 1 LUCR. 1. ii. 1140. 2 HOR. 1. ii.  Epist. ii. 55.

horse; nor handsomely array a hawke on my fist, nor cast her off, or
let her flie, nor could never speake to dogges, to birds, or to
horses. The conditions of my body are, in fine, very well agreeing
with those of my minde, wherein is nothing lively, but onely a
compleate and constant vigor.  I endure labour and paine, yet not very
well, unlesse I carry myselfe unto it, and no longer than my desire
leadeth and directeth me.

  Molliter austerum studio fallente laborem./1

  While earnestnesse for sport or gaine,

  Sweetly deceives the sowrest paine,

Otherwise, if by any pleasure I be not allured, and if I have other
direction than my genuine and free will, I am nothing worth, and I can
never fadge well: for I am at such a stay, that except for health and
life, there is nothing I will take the paines to fret my selfe about,
or will purchase at so high a rate as to trouble my wits for it, or be
constrained thereunto.

  ----- Tanti mihi non sit opaci

  Omnis arena

  Tagi, quodgue in mare volvitur aurum:/2

  So much I weigh not shadow Tagus sande,

  Nor gold that roules into the Sea from land,



I am extreamelie lazie and idle, and exceedingly free, both by nature
and art.  I would as willingly lend my blood as my care. {amateur+} I
have a minde free and altogether her owne; accustomed to follow her
ownw humor.  And to this day never had, nor commanding, nor forced
master.  I have gon as farre, and kept what pace pleased me best:
which hath enfeebled and made me unprofitable to serve others, and
made me fit and apt, but onely for my selfe.  And as for me, no man
ever needed to force this heavie, lither, and idle nature of mine;
for, having even from my birth found my selfe in such a degree of
fortune, have found occasion to stay there (an occasion
notwitlistanding, that a thousand others of mine acquaintance

-----1 SEN. 1. ii.  Sat. ii. 12. 2 JUVEN.  Sat. iii. 54.  would have
taken as

a plancke to passe over to search, to agitation, and to unquietness.
And as I have sought for nothing, so I have taken nothing.

  Non agimur tumidis venus Aquilone secundo,

  Non tamen adversis aetatem ducimus austi is:

  Viribus, ingenio, specte, virtute, loco, re,

  Extremi primorum, extremis usque priores./1

  With full sailes prosp'rous winde, we do not drive,

  Nor yet with winde full in our teeth doe live.

  In strength, in wit, in vertue, shape, goods, place,

  Last of the first, before the last we pace.

I have had no need but of sufficiencie to content my selfe, which
being well taken is ever a regiment for the mind, equally difficult in
all sorts of conditions; and which by use we see more easily found in
want than in plenty; peradventure, because that according to the
course of our other passions, the greedinesse of riches is more
sharpened by their uses than by their need: and the vertue of
moderation more rare than that of patience.  And I have had no need
but to enjoy those goods quietly, which God of his bounty had bestowed
upon me.  I have tasted no kinde of tedious trouble.  I have seldome
mannaged other than mine owne businesse: or if I have, it hath beene
on condition I might do it at my leisure, and according to my will,
committed unto me, by such as trusted me and knew me well, and would
not importune me.  For the skilfull rider will reape some service of a
restie and wind-broken jade.  My very childe-hood. hath beene directed
by a soft, milde, gentle and free fashion, and ever exempted from
rigorous subjection.  Al which hath endowed me with a delicate kinde
of complexion, and made me incapable of any care: So that I love men
should conceale my losses from me and the disorders which concerne me.
I n the chapter of my charges and expences, I have set down, that
mynegligence+ or carelessnesse+{sprezzatura+} costs me, both to feed
and entertaine my selfe.

----- 1 HOR. 1. ii.  Epist. ii. 101.

  ----- haec nempe super sunt,

  Quae dominum fallant, quae prosint furibus./1


  This remnant of accompts I have,

  Which may deceive Lords, help a Knave.

I love not to know an accompt of what I have, that I may lesse exactly
feele my losses: I desire those that live with me, where they want
affection or good effects, to cozen and pay me with good apparances.
For want of sufficient constancy to endure the importunity of contrary
or crosse accidents, whereunto we are subject; and because I cannot
alwaies keepe my selfe prepared to governe and order my affaires as
much as I am able, I foster this opinion in me, relying wholly
uponfortune+, and ready to take everything at the worst, and resolve
to beare that worst mildly and patiently.  About that only doe I busie
my selfe, and to that end do I direct all my discourses.  In any
dangerous matter I care not so much how I may avoide it, and how
little it importeth whether I avoid it or no; and what were it if
would continue in it?  Being unable to direct events I governe my
selfe; and if they apply not themselves to me, I apply my selfe to
them: {Epictetus+} I have no great art to shunne fortune, and how to
scape or force it, and with wisedome to addresse matters to my liking:
I have also lesse sufferance to endure the sharpe and painefull care
which belongeth to that.  And the most toilsome state for me is to be
doubtful in matters of weight, and agitated between feare and hope. To
deliberate, be it but in slight matters, doth importune me.  And I
feel my spirit more perplexed to suffer the motions of doubt and
shakings of consultation, than to be settled and resolved about any
accident whatsoever after the chance is once cast.  Fewe passions have
troubled my sleepe but of deliberations the least doth trouble it.
Even as of high-waies, I willingly seeke to avoid the downe-hanging
and slippery, and take the beaten-path, though myrie and deepe, so I
may go no lower, and there seeke I safetiee. So love I pure mishapes,
and which

----- 1 HOR. 1. i.  Epist. vi. 45.

exercise and turmoile me no more, after the uncertaintie of their
mending: and which even at the first cast, drive me directly into
sufferance.

  ----- dubiae plus torquent mala./1

  Evils yet in suspence,


  Doe give us more offence.

In events, I carry my selfe man-like; in the conduct childishly.  The
  horror of a fall doth more hurt me than the blow.  The play is not
  worth the candle.  The covetous man hath a worse reckoning of his
  passion than the poore; and the jealous man than the cuckold.  And
  it is often lesse harme for one to loose his farme, than pleade and
  wrangle for it: the slowest march is the safest. {carelessness+} It
  is the seate ofconstancie+. Therein you have no need but of
  yourselfe.  There she takes her footing and wholly resteth upon her
  selfe.  This example of a gentleman+, whom many have knowne, hath it
  not some Philosophicall shew?  This man having passed all his youth
  like a good fellow, a jollie companion, a great talker, and a merry
  ladd, being now well in yeares, would needs be married.  Remeinbring
  himselfe how much the subject of cuckoldry had given him cause to
  speake and scoff at others; to put himselfe under covert-baron, he
  tooke him a wife from out that place where all men may have them for
  money, and with her made his alliance: good morrow whoore, good
  morrow cuckold.  And there is nothing wherewith he oftener and more
  openly entertained such as came unto him, than with this tale:
  whereby he bridled the secret pratlings of mockers, and blunted the
  point of their reproch.  Concerning ambitious which is next
  neighbor, or rather daughter, to presumption, it had beene needfull
  (to advance me) that fortune had come to take me by the hand: for to
  put in my selfe into any care for an uncertaine hope, and to submit
  my selfe to all difficulties, waiting on such as seeke to thrust
  themselfe 1 SEN.  Agam. yt iii. sc. 1, 29.  into credite and
  reputation, in the beginning of their progresse I could never have
  done it.

  ----- Spem pretio non emo,/1

  Expence of present pay


  For hope, I do not lay.

  I fasten myself on that which I see and hold, and go not far from
  the shore:

  Alter remus aquas, alter tibi radat arenas./2

  Keeps water with one oare,

  With th' other grate the shore.

Besides a man seldome comes to these preferments but in hazarding
first his owne: and I am of opinion if that which a man hath sufficeth
to maintaine the condition wherein he was borne and brought up, it is
folly to let it goe upon the uncertainety of encreasing the same. He
to whom fortune refuseth meanes to settle his estate and establish a
quiet and reposed being is excusable if he cast what he hath at
hazards since thus as well as thus necessitie sends him to shift and
search out.

  Capienda rebus in malis preceps via est./3

  A headlong course is best,

  When mischiefes are addrest.

And I rather excuse a younger brother to make sale of his inheritance
than him who hath the honor of his house in charge, who cannot fall
into wants but through his default.  I have by the counsell of my good
friends of former times found the way shorter and easier to rid my
selfe of this desire and keepe my selfe husht:

  Cui sit conditio dulcis, sine pulvere palmae./4

  Who like it well to beare the prise,

  But take no toile in any wise.

Judging also rightly of my forces that they were not capable of great
matters: and remembering the saying 1 TER.  Adel. act ii. sc. 2. 2
PROP. 1. iii. Eleg. ii. 23. 3 SEN.  Agam. act ii. sc. 1, 47. 3
HOR. 1. i.  Epist. i. 51.  of Lord Oliver, whilome Chancellor of
France, who said that Frenchmen might be compared to apes, who,
climbing up a tree, never cease skipping from bough to bough, till
they come to the highest, where they shew their bare tailes.

  Turpe est quod nequeat capiti committere pondus,

  Et pressum inflexo mox dare terga genu./1

  'Tis shame, more than it can well beare, on head to packe,

  And thereby soone oppress't with bended knee flie backe.

Such qualities as are now in me void of reproach, in that age I deemed
unprofitable.  The facilitie of my maners had been named faintnesse
and weakness, faith and conscience would have been thought scrupulous
and so superstitious: liberty and freedome, importunate,
inconsiderate, and rash.  Misfortune serveth to some purpose.  It is
not amiss to be born in a much depraved age for in comparison of
others, you are judged vertuous, very cheape.  In our dayes he that is
but a parricide, or a sacrilegious person, is a man of honesty and
honor.

  Nunc si depositum non inficiatur amicus,

  Si reddat veterem cum tota aeruigine follem,

  Prodigiosa fides, et Thuscis digna libellis,

  Quaeque coronatad lustrari debeat agna./2

  If now a friend deny not what was laid in trust,

  If wholly he restore th'old bellowes with their rust:

  A wondrous trust, to be in chronicles related,

  And should with sacrifice, as strange, be expiated.

And never was there time or place wherein more assured and great
reward was proposed unto Princes for goodnesse and justice. The first
that shall be advised by these meanes to thrust himselfe into favour
and credit, I am much deceived if in part of paiment he get not the
start of his fellowes.  Force and violence can do very much, but,
never all.  Wee see merchants, country justices, and artificers to
march cheeke by jowl with our nobilitie in valour and militarie
discipline. {peasant+}

----- 1 PROP. 1. iii.  Eleg. viii. 5. 2 JUVEN.  Sat. xiii. 60.

They performe honourable combates, both publike and private.  They
batter and defend townes and cities in our present warres.  A Prince
smothereth his cornmendation amid this throng.  Let him shine over
others with humanities, with truth, loyalties temperance, and above
all with justice, markes now adaies rare, unknowne, and exiled.  It is
only the peoples will wherewith he may effect what he pleaseth: and no
other qualities can allure their will so much as they as being the
profitablest for them: Nihil est tam populare quam bonitas. 'Nothing
is so popular as goodnesse+ is.  By this proposition I had been a rare
areat man as by that of certaine ages past I am now a pigyney and
popular man; in which it was common.  If stronger qualities did not
concurre with all, to see a man temperate in his revenges, milde in
revenging of offences, religious in keeping of his word, neither
double nor over tractable, nor applying his faith to others will, or
to every occasion. {list_of_virtues+} I would rather let all affaires
go to wracke than breake my word for their availe.  For touching this
new-found vertue of faining and dissimulation, which now is so much in
credit, I hate it to the death: and of all vices I finde none that so
much witnesseth demissenesse and basenesse of heart. {PlainDealer+!}
It is a coward and servile humour for a man to disguise and bide
himselfe under a maske, and not dare to shew himselfe as he is.
Thereby our men address themselves to trecherie: being trained to
utter false words, they make no conscience to breake them.  A generous
minde ought not to belie his thoughts, but, make shew of his inmost
parts: there all is good, or at least all is humane. Aristotle thinkes
it an office of magnanimitie to hate and love openly, to judge and
speake with all libertie, and never (though prise of truth goe on it)
to make esteeme either of the approbation or reprobation of others.
Appolonius said it was for servants to lie, and for free-men to speake
truth.  It is the chiefe and fundamentall part of
vertue. {PlainDealer!+!} Shee must be loved for her owne sake.  He
that speaketh truth because he is bound to doe so, and for that he
serveth, and that feares not to tell a lie when it little importeth
another man, is not sufficiently true.  My mind of her own complexion
detesteth falsehood and hateth to think on it.  I feele an inward
bashfulnes and a stinging remorse if at any time it scape me, as
sometimes it doth if unpremeditated occasions surprise me.  A man must
not alwaies say all he knowes, {Kent+} for that were follie: but what
a man speakes ought to be agreeing to his thoughts, otherwise it is
impiety.  I know not what benefit they expect that ever faine, and so
uncessantly dissemble: except it be not to be beleeved, even when they
speake truly.  That may deceive men once or twice, but to make a
profession to cary it away smoothly, and as some of our Princes have
done, to boast that if their shirt were privie to their secret and
true cogitanons, they would burne it: which was the saying of ancient
Metellus Macedonicus and that he who cannot dissemble cannot reign,
serves but only to warne those who have to deale with them, that what
they say is but untruth and dissimulation: Quo quis versutior et
callidior est hoe invisior et suspectior, detracta opinione
probitatis:/1 'The finer-headed and more subtle-brained a man is, the
more is he hated and suspected if once the opinion of honesty be taken
from him.' It were great simplicity for a man to suffer himselfe to be
mis-led either by the lookes or wordes of him that outwardly
professeth what he is not inwardly, as did Tiberius. And I know not
what share such people may challenge in the commerce of men, never
producing any thing that may be taken for good paiment.  He who is
disloyall to truth is likewise false against lying.  Such as in our
daies; in the establishing of a Princes dutie, have only considered
the good and felicitie of his affaires, and preferred the same before
the respect of his faith and conscience, would say something to a
Prince whose affaires fortune hath so disposed that with once breaking
and falsifying of his word he might for ever confirme and establish
them.  But it goeth otherwise. A man may more than once come 1 CIC.
Off. 1. i.  to such a bargaine.  A man during his life concludeth more
than one peace or treatie.  The commodity or profit that inviteth them
to the first disloyalty (and daily some offer themselves, as to all
other trecheries), sacrileges, murders, rebellions, treasons, are
undertaken for some kinde of profit. But this first gaine brings ever
infinite losses and dangers with it: casting this Prince from-out all
commerce and meanes of negotiation by the example of this infidelitie.
Soliman of the Ottomans race (a race little regarding the keeping of
promises or performance of covenants), at what time he caused his
armie to land at Otranto (I being then but a childe), having knowne
that Mercurin of Gratinara, and the inhabitants of Castro, were
detained prisoners after the towne was yeelded, contrary to that which
by his captaines had beene capitulated with them, he sent word they
should be released, and that having otherweighty enterprises in hand
in that country, such disloyalty, although it had apparance of great
and present benefit, yet in time to come it would bring a distrust and
reproch of infinite prejudice. As for me, I had rather be importunate
and indiscreet than a flatterer+ and a dissembler.  I allow a man may
entermingle some point of fiercenesse and wilfulnesse to keepe
himselfe so entire and open as I am, without consideration of others.
And mee seemeth I become a little more free where I should be lesse,
and that by the opposition of respect I grow earnest.  It may also be
that for want of art I follow mine owne nature.  Presenting to the
greater sort the very same licence of speech and boldnes of
countenance that I bring from my house: I perceive how much it
inclineth towards indiscretion and incivilitie+. But although I be so
fashioned, my spirit is not sufficiently yeelding to avoid a sudden
question, or to scape it by some winding, nor to dissemble a truth,
nor have I memory able to continue it so fained, nor assurance
sufficient to maintaine it; and I play the braggard+ through
feeblenesse.  And therefore I apply my selfe to ingenuitie,
{simplicitie+} and ever to speake truth and what I think; both by
complexion and by intention; leaving the successe thereof unto
fortune.  Aristippus said that the chiefest commoditie he reaped by
philosophy was, that he spake freely and sincerely to all men.  Memory
is an instrument of great service, and without which, judgement wil
hardly discharge his duty, wherof I have great want.  What a man will
propose unto me, he must doe it by peecemeales: for, to answer to a
discourse that hath many heads, lieth not in my power. I cannot
receive a charge, except I have my writing tables about me: and if I
must remember a discourse of any consequence, be it of any length, I
am driven to this vile and miserable necessitie, to learne every word
I must speake by rote; otherwise I should never do it wel or
assuredly, for feare my memory should in my greatest need faile me;
which is very hard unto me, for I must have three houres to learne
three verses.  Moreover, in any long discourse, the libertie or
authoritie to remoove the order, to change a word, uncessantly
altering the matter, makes it more difficult to be confirmed in the
authors memory.  And the more I distrust it, the more it troubleth me.
It serveth me better by chance, and I must carelesly sollicite her,
for if I urge her, she is astonished; and if it once beginne to waver,
the more I sound her, the more entangled and intricate she
proveth. She wil wait upon me when she list, not when I please.  And
what I feele in my memories I feele in many other parts of mine.  I
eschew cornmandement, duty, and compulsion.  What I doe easily and
naturally, if I resolve to doe it by expresse and prescribed
appointment, I can then doe it no more. Even in my body, those parts
that have some liberty, and more particular jurisdiction, doe
sometimes refuse to obey me if at any time I appoint and enjoine them
to doe me some necessarie services.  This forced and tyrannicall
preordinance doth reject them, and they either for spight or feare
shrinke and are quailed.  Being once in a place where it is reputed a
barbarous discourtesie not to pledge those that drinke to you, where
although I were used with al libertie, in favor of certaine ladies
that were in company, according to the fashion of the country, I would
needs play the good fellow.  But it made us all mery; for the threats
and preparation, that I should force my selfe beyond my naturall
custome, did in such sort stop and stuffe my throat, that I was not
able to swallow one drop, and was barr'd of drinking all the repast. I
found my selfe glutted and ful of drink by the overmuch swilling that
my imagination had fore-conceived.  This effect is more apparant in
those whose imagination is more vehement and strong: yet it is
naturall: and there is no man but shall sometimes have a feeling of
it.  An excellent archer being condemned to death, was offered to have
his life saved if he would but shew any notable triall of his
profession, refused to make proofe of it; fearing lest the contention
of his will should make him to misse-direct his hand, and that in lieu
of saving his life, he might also lose the reputation+ he had gotte in
shooting in a bow.  A man whose thoughts are busie about other
matters, shall very neere within an inch keepe and alwaies hit one
selfe same number and measure of paces, in a place where he walketh;
but if heedily he endevour to measure and count them, he shall finde
that what he did by nature and chance, he cannot doe it so exactly by
desseign. {sprezzatura+} My library (which, for a countrey library,
may passe for a very faire one) is seated in a corner of my house: if
any thing come into my minde, that either I must goe seeke or write in
it, for feare I should forget it in crossing of my court, I must
desire some other body to remember the same for me.  If speaking, I
embolden my selfe never so little to digresse from my discourse, I do
ever lose it; which makes me to keepe my selfe in my speech, forced,
neere and close.  Those that serve me, I must ever call them either by
their office or countrey: for I finde it very hard to remember names.
Well may I say it hath three syllables, that its sound is harsh, or
that it beginneth or endeth with such a letter.  And should I live
long, I doubt not but I might forget mine own name, as some others
have done heretofore.  Messala Corvinus lived two yeeres without any
memory at all, which is also reported of George Trapezoncius.  And for
mine owne interest, I doe often ruminate what manner of life theirs
was, and whether wanting that part, I shall have sufficient to
maintaine my selfe in any good sort: which looking neere unto I feare
that this defect, if it be perfect, shall lose all the functions of my
soule.

  Plenus rimarum sum, hac atque illac perfluo./1

  I am so full of holes, I cannot hold,

  I runne out ev'ry way, when tales are told.


It hath often befallen me to forget the word which but three houres
before I had either given or received of another, and to forget where
I had laid my purse; let Cicero say what he list.  I helpe my selfe to
loose what I particularly locke up.  Memoria certe non modo
philosophiam, sed omnis vitae usum, omnesque artes una maxime
continet: 'Assuredly memorie alone, of all other things, compriseth
not onely philosophy, but the use of our whole life, and all the
sciences.  Memorie is the receptacle and the case of knowledge.  Mine
being so weake, I have no great cause to complaine if I know but
little.  I know the names of Arts in generall, and what they treate
of, but nothing further, I turne and tosse over bookes, but do not
studie them; what of them remaines in me is a thing which I no longer
acknowledge to be any bodies else.  Onely by that hath my judgement
profited: and the discourses and imaginations wherewith it is
instructed and trained up.  The authours, the place, the words; and
other circumstances, I sodainly forget: and am so excellent in
forgetting, that as much as any thing else I forget mine owne writings
and compositions.  Yea, mine owne savings are every hand-while
alleadged against my selfe, when God wot I perceive it not.  He that
would know of me, whence or from whom the verses or examples which
here I have hudled up are taken,

----- 1 TER.  Eun. act. i. sc. 2.

should greatly put me to my shifts, and I could hardly tell it
him. Yet have I not begged them, but at famous and very wel knowen
gates, which though they were rich in themselves, did never please me,
unlesse they also came from rich and honourable hands, and that
authority concurre with reason.  It is no great marvell if my booke
follow the fortune of other bookes, and my memory forgo or forget as
wel what I write as what I reade: and what I give as well as what I
receive.  Besides the defect of memory, I have others, which much
further my ignorance.  My wit is dull and slow, the least cloud
dimmeth it, so that (for example sake) I never proposed riddle unto it
(were it never so easie) that it was able to expound.  There is no
subtilitie so vaine but confounds me.  In games wherein wit may beare
a part, as of chesse, of card, of tables, and others, I could never
conceive but the common and plainest draughts.  My apprehension is
very sluggish and gloomy; but what it once holdeth the same it keepeth
fast: and for the time it keepes it, the same it embraceth generally,
strictly, and deepely. My sight is quicke, sound, perfect, and
farre-seeing, but easily wearied if much charged or emploied.  By
which occasion I can have no great commerce with books but by others
service which reade unto me.  Plinie the younger can instruct those
that have tried it, how much this fore-slowing importeth those that
give themselves to this occupation.  There is no spirit so wretched or
so brutish wherein some particular facultie is not seene to shine; and
none so low buried, but at one hole or other it will sally out
sometimes. And how it commeth to passe that a minde blinde and
slumbering in all other things, is in some particular effects, lively,
cleare, and excellent, a man must inquire of cunning masters.  But
those are the faire spirits which are universall, open and readie to
all, if not instructed, at least to be instructed.  Which I alleage to
accuse mine: for, be it either through weakenesse, or retchlessenesse
(and to be carelesse of that which lieth at our feet, which wee have
in our hands, which neerest concerneth the use of life, is a thing
farre from my dogma or doctrine) there is none so simple or so
ignorant as mine, in divers such common matters, and of which, without
imputation or shame, a man should never be ignorant; whereof I must
needs tell some examples.  I was borne and brought up in the countrie,
and amidst husbandry: I have since my predecessours quit me the place
and possession of the goods I enjoy, both businesse and husbandry in
hand, I cannot yet cast account either with penne or counters. There
are divers of our French coines I know not: nor can I distinguish of
one graine from another, be it in the field or in the barne, unlesse
it be very apparant: nor do I scarcely know the difference betweene
the cabige or letuce in my garden.  I understand not the names of the
most usuall tooles about husbandrie, nor of the meanest principles of
tillage, which most children know.  I was never skilfull in
mechanicall arts, nor in traffike or knowledge of merchandise, nor in
the diversitie and nature of fruits, wines, or cates, nor can I make a
hawke, physike a horse, or teach a dogge. And since I must make ful
shew of my shame or ignorance, it is not yet a moneth since that I was
found to be ignorant wherto leven served to make bread withal; or what
it was to cunne wine. {amateur+} The Athenians were anciently wont to
thinke him very apt for the mathematikes, that could cunningly order
or take up a faggot of brushe wood?  Verily a man might drawe a much
contrarie conclusion from me: for let me have all that may belong to a
kitchin, yet shall I be ready to starve for hunger.  By these parts of
my confession one may imagine divers others to my cost and
detriment. But howsoever I make myselfe knowne, alwaies provided it be
as I am, indeed I have my purpose.  And I excuse not my selfe that I
dare set downe in writing so base and frivolous matters as these.  The
basenesse of the subject forceth me thereunto.  Let who so list accuse
my project, but not my progresse. So it is that without being warned
of others I see very well how little this weigheth or is worth, and I
perceive the fonduesse of my purpose.

  It is sufficient that my judgement is not dismayed or distracted,
  whereof these be the Essaies.

  Nasutus sis usque licet, sis denique nasus

  Quantum noluerit ferre rogatus Atlas:

  Et possis ipsum tu deridere Latinum,

  Non potes, in nugas dicere plura meas,

  Ipse ego quam dixi; quid dentem dente juvabit

  Rodere? carne opus est, si satur esse velis.

  Ne perdas operam, qui se mirantur, in illos

  Virus habe, nos haec novimus esse nihil./1

  Suppose you were long-nos'd, suppose such nose you weare

  As Atlas, if you should intreat him, would not beare,

  That you in flouting old Latinus can be fine.

  Yet can you say no more about these toyes of mine,

  Then I have said; what boote tooth with a tooth to whet?

  You must have fleshe, if you to glut your selfe be set.

  Loose not your paines; 'gainst them who on themselves are doting

  Keepe you your sting: we know these things of ours are nothing.

I am not bound to utter no follies so I be not deceived to know them:
and wittingly to erre is so ordinarie in me that I erre not much
otherwise; and seldome erre casually.  It is a small matter to yeeld
the fond actions unto the rashnesse of my humors since I cannot
warrant my selfe ordinarily to yeeld them the vicious.  Being at
Barleduc I saw for the commendation of Renate the King of Sicilies
memory a picture which with his owne hands he had made of himselfe,
presented unto our King Francis the second: why is it not as lawfull
for every man else to pourtray himself with his pen, as it was for him
to do it with a pensell?  I wil not then forget this blemish, unfit to
be seene of all.  That is irresolution, a most incommodious defect in
the negotiation of worldly affaires: I cannot resolve in matters
admitting doubtfulnesse:

  Ne si, ne no, nel cuor mi suona intiero./2

  Nor yea, nor nay, sounds clearely in my heart.


----- 1 MART. 1. xiii.  Epig. ii. 1. 2 PETR.  Pa. i.
Sen. cxxxviii. 8.

I can maintaine an opinion, but not make choiee of it: for in Humane
things what side soever a man leaneth on, many apparences prevent
themselves unto us, which confirm us in them: and Chrysippus the
Philosopher was wont to say that he would learne nothing else of his
maisters, Zeno and Cleanthes, but their doctrines simply: for proofes
and reasons he would finde enough of himselfe.  Let me turne to what
side I will, I ever finde sufficient matter and liklyhood to keepe my
selfe unto it.  Thus keepe I doubt and liberty to my selfe, to chuse,
untill occasion urge me, and then (to confesse the truth), as the
common saying is, I cast my feather to the wind, and yeeld to fortunes
mercie.  A verie light inclination and a slender circumstance carries
me away.

  Dum in dubio est animus paulo momento huc atque illuc impellitur./1

  While mind is in suspence, with small ado,

  'Tis hither, thither, driven fro and to.

The uncertainty of my judgement is in many occurrences so equally
balanced as I would willingly compromise it to the deciding of chance
and of the dice.  And I note with great consideration of our humane
imbecilities the examples which the history of God it selfe hath left
us of this use, to remit the determination of elections in doubtfull
matters unto fortune and hazard.  Sors cecidit super Matthiam:/2 'The
lot fell upon Matthias.' Humane reason is a two-edged dangerous sword;
even in Socrates his hand, her most inward and familiar friend, marke
what a many-ended staffe it is.  So am I only fit to follow, and am
easily carried away by the throng.  I doe not greatly trust mine owne
strength, to undertake to command or to lead.  I rejoyce to see my
steps traced by others.  If I must run the hazard of an uncertaine
choice, I would rather have it be under such a one who is more assured
of his opinions, and more wedded to them, then I am of

----- 1 TER.  And. act i. sc. 3. 2 ACTS, ch. i. v. 25.

mine; the foundation and platforme of which I flnd to be very
slippery; yet am I not very easie to change, forsomuch as I perceive a
like weaknesse in contrary opinions.  Ipsa consuetudo assentiendi
periculosa esse videtur, et lubrica:/1 'The very custome of assenting
seemeth hazardous and slippery:' Namely in politik affaires, wherein
is a large field open to all motions, and to contestation:

  Iusta pari premitur veluti cum pondere libra,

  Prona nec hac plus parte sedet, nec surgit ab illa./2

  As when an even skale with equall weight is peized,

  Nor falles it downe this way, or is it that way raised.

As for example, Machiavels+ discourses were very solid for the
subject: yet hath it been very easie to impugne them, and those that
have done have left no lesse facilitie to impugne theirs.  A man might
ever find answeres enough to such an argument, both rejoynders,
double, treble, quadruple, with this infinite contexture of debates,
that our pettie-foggers have wrye-drawne and wrested as much as ever
they could in favour of their pleas and processes:

  Caedimur, et totidem plagis consumimus hostem./3

  Wee by our foes are beaten, if not slain,

  Wee with as many strokes waste them againe;


Reasons having no other good ground than experience, and the diversity
of humane events presenting us with infinite examples of all manner of
formes.  A wise man of our times saith that where our Almanakes say
warme should a man say cold, and in lieu of drie, moyst; and ever set
downe the contrarie of what they foretell; were he to lay a wager of
one or others successes he would not care what side he tooke, except
in such things as admit no uncertaintie; as to promise extreame heat
at Christmas, and exceeding cold at Midsomer.  The like I thinke of
these politike discourses. What part soever you are put unto, you have
as good a

----- 1 CIC.  Acad.  Qu. 1. iv. 2 TIBUL. 1. iv.  Hero. v. 41. 3
HOR. 1. ii. Epist. ii. 97.

game as your fellow: provided you affront not the apparant and plain
principles.  And therefore (according to my humour) in publike
affaires there is no course so bad (so age and constancie be joyned
unto it) that is not better then change and alteration. {rightist+}
Our manners are exceedingly corrupted, and with a marvellous
inclination bend towards worse and worse. Of our lawes and customes
many are barbarous, and divers monstrous; notwithstanding, by reason
of the difficultie to reduce us to better estate, and of the danger of
this subversion, if I could fixe a pegge into our wheel+ and stay it
where it now is, I would willingly doe it.

  -----nunquam adeo foedis adeoque pudendis

  Ultimur exemplis, ut non peiora suiper sint./1


  Examples of so filthy shamefull kinde

  We never use, but worse remaines behind.

Instabilitie+ is the worst I find in our state, and that our lawes, no
more than our garments, can take no setled forme.  It is an easie
matter to accuse a state of imperfection, since all mortall things are
full of it.  As easie is it to beget in a people a contempt of his
ancient observances: No man ever undertooke it, but came to an end:
But to establish a better state in place of that which is condemned
and raced out, divers who have attempted it have shronk under the
burthen.  Touching my conduct, my wisdome hath small share therein.  I
am very easily to be directed by the worlds publike order.  Oh happy
people that doth what is commanded, better then they which command,
without vexing themselves about causes; which suffer themselves gently
to be rowled on, according to the heavens rowling.  Obedience is never
pure and quiet in him who talketh, pIeadeth, and contendeth.  In some
(to returne to my selfe) the only matter for which I make some accompt
of my selfe is that wherein never man did thinke himselfe defective.
My commendation is vulgar, common, and popular; for who ever thought
he wanted wit?  It were a proposition which in it selfe would imply

----- 1 JUV.  Sat. viii. 183.

contradiction.  It is an infirmity that is never where it is seene, it
is very strong and fast-holding, but yet pierced and dissipated by the
first beame of the patients sight, as doth the sunnes raies scatter
and disperse a gloomie mist.  For a man to accuse himselfe were to
excuse himselfe of that subject; and to condemne himselfe, an
absolving of himselfe.  There was never so base a porter, nor so silly
a woman, but thought he had sufficient wit for his provision.  We
easily know in others the advantage of courage, of bodily strength, of
experience of disposition, and of beauties but we never yeeld the
advantage of judgement to any body: and the reasons which part from
the simple'naturall discourse in others, wee thinke that had we but
looked that way, wee had surely found them.  The skill, the knowledge,
the stile, and such like parts which we see in strange workes, we
easily perceive whether they exceede ours; but the meere productions
of wit and understanding every man deemeth it lyeth in him to meete
with the very like, and doth hardly perceive the weight and
difficultie of it, except (and that very scarcelv) in an extreame and
incomparable distance.  And he that should clearely see the height of
a strangers judgement, would come and bring his unto it.  Thus is it a
kinde of exercising whereof a man may hope but for meane commendation
and small praise, and a manner of composition of little or no harme at
all.  And then for whom do you write? The wiser sort, unto whom
belongeth bookish jurisdiction, know no other price but of doctrine,
and avow no other proceeding in our wits but that of erudition and
art.  If you have mistaken one Scipio for an other, what of any worth
have you left to speake-of?  He that is ignorant of Aristotle
(according to them) he is therewithall ignorant of himselfe.  Popular
and shallow-beaded mindes cannot perceive the grace or comelinesse,
nor judge of a smooth and quaint discourse.  Now these two kindes
possess the world. The third, unto whose share you fall, of regular
wits, and that are strong of themselves, is so rare that justly it
hath neither name or ranke amongst us; he loseth halfe his time that
doth aspire or endeavour to please it.  It is commonly said that the
justest portion nature hath given us of the graces is that of sense
and understanding: for there is no man but is contented with the share
she hath allotted him.  Is it not reason?  He who should see beyond
that, should see further then his sight. I perswade my selfe to have
good and sound opinions: but who is not so perswaded of his owne: One
of the best trials I have of it is the small esteeme I make of
myselfe: for had they not been well assured they would easily have
suffered themselves to be deceived by the affection I beare unto my
selfe, singular, as he who bring it almost all unto my selfe, and that
spill but a little besides.  All that which others distribute thereof
unto an infinite number of acquaintances, to their glorie and
greatnesse, I referre to the repose of my spirit and to myselfe.  What
else-where escapes of it is not properly by the appointment of my
discourse:

  ----- mihi nempe valere et vivere doctus./1

  Well learn'd in what concerneth me,

  To live, and how in health to be.

As for my opinions, I finde them infinitely bold and constant to
condemne mine insufficiencies. {diffidence+} And to say truth, it is a
subject whereabout I exercise my judgement as much as about any other.
The world lookes ever for right, I turne my sight inward, there I fix
it, there I ammuse it.  Every man lookes before himselfe, I looke
within my selfe: I have no busines but with my selfe.  I uncessantly
consider, controle and taste my selfe: other men goe ever else-where
if they thinke well on it: they go ever foreward.

  ----- nemo in sese tentat descendere./2

  No man attempteth this Essay,


  Into himselfe to finde the way.

  as for me, I roule me unto my selfe.  This capacitie of sifting out
  the truth, what and howsoever it be in me,


----- 1 PERS.  Sat. iv. 23. 2 CIC.  Off. 1.  X.

and this free humour I have, not very easily to subject my beliefe, I
owe especially unto my selfe, for the most constant and generall
imaginations I have are those which (as one would say) were borne with
me: they are naturall unto me, and wholy mine.  I produced them raw
and simple, of a hardy and strong production, but somewhat troubled
and imperfect: which I have since established and fortified by the
authoritie of others, and by the sound examples of ancients+, with
whom I have found my selfe conformable in judgement: those have
assured me of my hold-fast of them, and have given me both the
enjoying and possession thereof more absolute and more cleare. The
commendation which every man seekes after for a vivacitie and
promptitude of wit, I chalenge the same by the order of a notable and
farre-sounding action, or of some particular sufficiencie; I pretend
it by the order, correspondencie, and tranquillitie of opinions and
customes.  Omnino si quidquam est decorum, nihil est profecto magis
quam aequabilitas universae vitae, tum singularum actionum: quam
conservare non possis, sit aliorum nat uram imitans, omittas tuam:
'Clearely if any thing bee decent for a man, nothing is more than an
even carriage and equability of his whole life, and every action
therein: which you cannot uphold if following the nature of others you
let passe your owne.  Behold here then how far forth I finde my selfe
guilty of that first part I said to be in the vice of presumption.
Concerning the second, which consisteth in not esteeming sufficiently
of others, I wot not whether I can so well excuse my selfe; for
whatsoever it cost me, I intend to speake what is of it.  It may be
the continuall commerce I have with ancient humours, and the idea of
those rich mindes of former ages doth bring me out of liking and
distaste both of others and of my selfe, or that in truth we live in
an age which produceth things but meane and indifferent.  So it is
that I know nothing worthy any great admiration. {ancients+} Also I
know not many men so familiarly as I should to be able to judge of
them: and those with whom the quality of my condition doth ordinarily
make me conversant are for the most part such as have little care for
the manuring of the soule, and to whom nothing is proposed for chiefe
felicitie but honour+, and for absolute perfection but
valour+. Whatsoever I see or beauteous or worthy in any other man, I
willingly commend and regard; yea, and I often endeare my selfe with
what I thinke of it, and allow my selfe to lie so farre forth: for I
cannot invent a false subject. I willingly witness with my friends
what I finde praise-worthy in them. And of an inch of valour, I
willingly make an inch and a halfe; but to lend them qualities they
have not, I cannot; and openly to defend their imperfections, I may
not: yea, bee they mine enemies, I shall sincerely give them their due
in witnessing their worth or honour.  My affection may change; my
judgement never.  And I confound not my quarrell with other
circumstances that are impertinent and belong not unto it.  And I am
so jealous of the liberty of my judgement, that for what passion
soever I can hardly quit it.  I wrong my selfe more in lying+ than him
of whom I lie.  This commendable and generous custome of the Persian
nation is much noted; they speake very honourably and justly of their
mortall enemies, and with those with whom they were at deadly fude and
warre, so farre forth as the, merit of their vertue deserved.  I know
divers men who have sundry noble and worthy parts; some wit, some
courage, some dexteritie, some conscience, some a readinesse in
speech, some one science, and some another: but of a great man in
generall, and that hath so many excellent parts together, or but one
in such a degree of excellencie as hee may thereby be admired, or but
compared to those of former ages whom we honour, my fortune hath not
permitted me to see one.  And the greatest I ever knew living (I meane
of naturall parts of the minde, and the best borne) was Estienne de la
Boetie.  Verily it was a compleat minde, and who set a good face and
shewed a faire countenance upon all matters; a minde after the old
stampe, and which had fortune therewith beene pleased, would no doubt
have brought forth wondrous effects, having by skill and study added
very much to his rich naturall gifts. But I know not how it comes to
passe, and surely it doth so, there is, as much vanitie and weakenesse
of understanding found in those that professe to have most
sufficicncie, that will entermeddle with learned vocations, and with
the charges that depend of books, as in any sort of people; whether it
be because there is more required and expected at their hands, and
common faults cannot be excused in them, or that the selfe- opinion of
knowledge emboldeneth them the more to produce and discover themselves
over-forward, whereby they lose and betray themselves.  As an
artificer doeth more manifest his sottishnesse in a rich piece of
worke which he hath in hand, if foolishly and against the rules of his
trade he seeke to apply it and entermeddle, than in a vile and base
one; and men are more offended at a fault or oversight in a statue of
gold than in one of clay.  These doe as much when they set foorth
things which in themselves and in their place would be good; for they
employ them without discretion, honouring their memory at the cost and
charge of their understanding: and doing honour to Cicero, to Galen,
to Ulpian, and to Saint Jerome to make themselves ridiculous.  I
willingly returne to this discourse of the fondnesse of our
institution: whose aime hath beene to make us not good and wittie, but
wise and learned.  She hath attained her purpose. lt hath not taught
us to follow vertue and embrace wisdome: but made an impression in us
of its Etymologie and derivation.{PlainDealer+} We can decline vertue,
yet can we not love it.  If wee know not what wisdome is by effect and
experience, wee know it by prattling and by rote.  We are not
satisfied to know the race, the alliances, and the pedigrees of our
neighbours, but we wil have them to be our friends and contract both
conversation and intelligence with them: It hath taught us the
definitions, the divisions and distinctions of vertue, as of the
surnames and branches of a genealogie, without having other care to
contract practise of familiaritie or private acquaintance betweene us
and it.  She hath appointed us for our learning, not bookes that have
sounder and truer opinions, but volumes that speake the best Greeke or
Latine; and amongst her choice words hath made the vainest humours of
antiquitie to glide into our conceits. A good institution changeth
judgement and manners, as it hapned to Polemon. This dissolute young
Graecian going one day by chance to heare a lecture of Xenocrates,
where he not onely marked the eloquence and sufficiencie of the
reader, and brought not home the knowledge of some notable thing, but
a more apparant and solide fruit, which was the sodaine change and
amendment of his former life.  Who ever heard such an effect of our
discipline?

  ----- faciasne quod olim

  Nutatus Polemon, ponas insignia morbi


  Fasciolas, cubital, focalia?  Potus ut ille

  Dicitur ex collo furtim carpsisse coronas,

  Postquam est impransi correptus voce magistri?/1

  Can you doe as did Polemon reformed,

  Cast-off your sicknes signes, which you deformed,

  Your bolsters, mufflers, swathes?  As he drinklinde,

  His drunken garland covertly declinde,

  By speech of fasting reader disciplinde?


The least disdainefull condition of men, me thinkes, is that which
through simplicitie+ holds the last ranke, and offereth us more
regular commerce. {common+} The customes and discourses of
countrie-clownish-men, I finde them commonly to be more conformable
and better disposed, according to the true prescription of
Philosophie, then are those of our Philosophers.{PlainDealer+} Plus
sapit vulqus, quia tantum, quantum opus cut, sapit: 'The vulgar is the
wiser, because it is but as wise as it must needes. The worthiest men
I have judged by eternall apparances (for, to judge them after my
fashion, they should be sifted nearer) concerning war+ and military
sufficiencie have been, the Duke of Guise, that died before Orleans,
and the whilom Marshal strozzi: For men extraordinarily sufficient and
endowed with no vulgar vertue, Oliver and L'Hospitall, both great
Cbancelors.

-----1 HOR.  Ser. 1. ii.  Sat. iii. 253.

of France.  Poesie hath likewise in mine opinion had hir vogue and
credit in our age.  We have store of cunning and able men in that
profession: Aurate, Beza, Buchanan, L'Hospital, Mont-dore, and
Turnebus.  As for French-men, I thinke they have attained the highest
degree of perfection that can or ever shall be, and in those parts
wherein Ronsart and excellent Bellay have written, I thinke they are
not farre short of the ancient perfection. Adrianus Turnebus knew
more, and better what he knew, than any man in his age or of many ages
past.  The lives of the late Duke of Alva and our Constable+
Mommorencie have beene very noble, and have had sundrie rare
resemblancies of fortune.  But the worthily-faire and glorious death
of the last in the full sight of Paris and of his King, for their
service against his nearest friends and alliance in the front of an
armie, victorious through his conduct of it, and with an handstroke in
that old age of his, deserveth in mine opinion to be placed and
registred amongst the most renouned and famous accidents of my times.
As also the constant goodness the mildnes in behaviour, and
conscionable fecility of Monsieur de la Noue in such an injustice of
armed factions (a very schoole of treason, of inhumanitie and
brigandage) wherein he was ever brought up, a worthie and famous man
of warre+ and most experienced in his profession.  I have greatly
pleased my selfe in publishing in sundrie places the good hope I have
of Marie de Gournay le Lars, my daughter in alliance, and truely of me
beloved with more then a fatherly love, and as one of the best parts
of my being enfeofed in my home and solitariness.  There is nothing in
the world I esteem more then hir.  If childe-hoode may presage any
future successes hir minde shal one day be capable of many notable
things, and amongst others, of the perfection of this thrice-sacred
amitie+ whereunto we read not, hir sex could yet attaine; the
sinceritie and soliditie of her demeanors are therein already
sufficient; hir kind affection towards me is more than superabounding
and such indeede as nothing more can be wished unto it, so that the
apprehension which she hath of my aproching end, by reason of the
fiftie five years {usthem+} wherein her lisp hath beene to know me,
would somewhat lesse cruelly trouble hir.  The judgement she made of
my first Essayes, being a woman of this age so yong, alone where shee
dwelleth, and the exceeding vehemencie wherewith she loved me and long
time by the onely esteem which before ever she saw me, she had by them
conceived of me she desired me, is an accident most worthy
consideration.  Other vertues have had little or no currantnesse at
all in this age: but valour is become popular by reason of our civill
warres, and in this part there are minds found amongst us very
constant, even to perfection and in great number, so that the choice
is impossible to be made.  Loe heere what hitherto I have knowen of
any extraordinary and not common greatnesse.

CHAPTER 2.XVIII+ OF GIVING THE LIE

YEA but, will some tell me, this desseigne in a man to make himselfe a
subject to write of might be excused in rare and famous men, and who
by their reputation had bred some desire in others of their
acquaintance. It is true, I confesse it, and I know that a
handicraftsman will scarcely looke off his worke to gaze upon an
ordinary man: whereas to so a notable great person come into a towne,
he will leave both worke and shop.  It ill- beseemeth any man to make
himselfe knowen, onely he excepted that hath somewhat in him worthy
imitation, and whose life and opinions may stand as a pattern to all.
Caesar and Xenophon have had wherewithall to ground and establish
their narration in the greatnesse of their deedes as on a just and
solid groundworke.  So are the jornall bookes of Alexander the great,
the Commentaries which Augustus, Cato, Brutus, Sylla, and divers
others had left of their gests, greatly to be desired.  Such mens
images are both beloved and studied, be they either in brasse or
stone.  This admonition is most true, but it concerneth me very
little.

  Non recito cuiquam: nisi amicis, idque rogatus,

  Non ubivis, coramve quibuslibet.  In medio qui


  Scripta foro recitant sunt multi, quique lavantes./1

  My writings I reade not, but to my friends, to any,

  Nor each-where, nor to all, nor but desir'd, yet many

  In market-place read theirs,

  In bathes, in barbers-chaires.


----- 1 HOR.  Ser. 1. i.  Sat. iv. 73.

I erect not here a statue to be set up in the marketplace of a towne,
or in a church, or in any other publike place:

  Non equidem hoc studeo bullatis ut mihi nugis

  Pagina turgescat:/1

  I studle not, my written leaves should grow

  Big-swolne with bubled toyes, which vaine breath's blow.

  Secreti loquimur./2

  We speake alone,

  Or one to one.

It is for the corner of a library, or to ammuse a neighbour, a
kinsman, or a friend of mine withall, who by this image may happily
take pleasure to renew acquaintance and to reconverse with me.  Others
have beene emboldned to speake of themselves because they have found
worthy add rich subject in themselves. 1, contrariwise, because I have
found mine so barren and so shallow, that it cannot admit suspition of
ostentation.  I willingly judge other mens actions; of mine by reason
of their nullity, I give small cause to judge.  I finde not so much
good in my self, but I may speake of it without blushing.  Oh what
contentment were were it unto me to hear somebody that would relate
the custome, the visage, the countenance, the most usuall words, and
the fortunes of my ancestors.  Oh, how attentively would I listen unto
it.  Verily it were an argument of a bad nature, to seeme to despise
the very pictures of our friends and predecessors, the fashion of
their garments and armes.  I keepe the writing, the manuall seale, and
a peculiar sword: and I reserve still in my cabinet certaine long
switches or wands which my father was wont to carry in his hand.
Paterna vestis et annulus, tanto charior est posteris, quanto erga
parentes maior affectus: 'The fathers garment and his ring is so much
more esteemed of his successors, as their affection is greater towards
their progenitors.  Notwithstanding if my posteritie be of another
minde, I shall have wherewith to be avenged,

----- 1 PERS.  Sat. v. 19. 2 Ib. 21.

for they cannot make so little accompt of me, as then I shal doe of
them.  All the commerce I have in this with the world is that I borrow
the instruments of their writing, as more speedy and more easie; in
requitall whereof I may peradventure hinder the melting of some piece
of butter in the market or a grocer from selling an ounce of pepper.

  Ne toga cordyllis,ne penula desit olivis,/1

  Lest fish-fry should a fit gowne want,

  Lest cloakes should be for olives scant.

  Et laxas scombris saepe dabo tunicas./2

  To long-tail'd mackrels often I,

  Will side-wide (paper) cotes apply.

And if it happen no man read me, have I lost my time to have
entertained my selfe so many idle houres about so pleasing and
profitable thoughts?  In framing this pourtraite by my selfe, I have
so often beene faine to frizle and trimme me, that so I might the
better extract my selfe that the patterne is thereby confirmed, and in
some sort formed.  Drawing my selfe for others, I have drawne my selfe
with purer and better colours than were my first.  I have no more made
my booke then my booke hath made me.  A booke consubstantiall to his
author: a peculiar and fit occupation.  A member of my life.  Not of
an occupation and end strange and forraine, as all other bookes.  Have
I mis-spent my time to have taken an account of my selfe so
continually and so curiously?  For those who onely run themselves over
by fantasie, and by speech for some houres, examine not themselves so
primely and exactly, nor enter they into themselves, as he doth who
makes his studie his work, and occupation of it; who with all his
might, and with all his credit, engageth himselfe to a register of
continuance.  The most delicious pleasures, though inwardly digested,
shun to leave any trace of themselves, and avoide the sight not onely
of the people, but of any

----- 1 MART. 1. xiii.  Epig. i. 1. 2 CATUL.  Epig.  Elog. xxvii. 8.

other.  How often hath this busines diverted me from tedious and
yrksome cogitations? (and all frivolous ones must bee deemed tedious
and yrksome). Nature hath endowed us with a large faculty to
entertaine our selves apart, and often calleth us unto it: to teach us
that partly we owe our selves unto society+, but in the better part
unto our selves.  To the end I may in some order and project marshall
my fantasie even to dote and keepe it from loosing and straggling in
the aire, there is nothing so good as to give it a body and register
so many idle imaginations as present themselves unto it.  I listen to
my humours and hearken to my conceits, because I must enroule them.
How often, being grieved at some action, which civility and reason
forbad me to withstand openly, have I disgorged my selfe upon them
here, not-without an intent of publike instruction?  And yet these
poeticall rods,

  Zon dessus l'oeil, zon sur le groin,

  Zon sur le dos du Sagoin,

are also better imprinted upon paper than upon the quicke flesh; what
if I lend mine ears somewhat more attentively unto bookes, sith I but
watch if I can filch something from them wherewith to enammell and
uphold mine? I never studie to make a booke, yet have I somewhat
studied, because I had already made it (if to nibble or pinch, by the
head or feet, now one Authour, and then another be in any sort to
study), but nothing at all to forme my opinions.  Yea, being long
since formed to assist, to second, and to serve them.  But whom shall
we believe, speaking of himselfe in this corrupted age? since there
are few or none who may beleeve speaking of others, where there is
lesse interest to lie.  The first part of customes corruption is the
banishment of truth: for, as Pindarus said, to be sincerely true is
the beginning of a great vertue; {PlainDealer+} and the first article
Plato requireth in the Governor of his Commonwealth.  Now adaies, that
is not the truth which is true, but that which is perswaded to others.
As we call money not onely that which is true and good, but also the
false; so it be currant.  Our nation is long since taxed with this
vice.  For Salvianus Massiliensis, who lived in the time of
Valentinian the Emperour, saith that amongst French-men to lie and
forsweare is no vice, but a manner of speach.  He that would endeare
this testimonie might say, it is now rather deemed a vertue among
them.  Men frame and fashion themselves unto it as to an exercise of
honour; for dissimulation is one of the notablest qualities of this
age.  Thus have I often considered whence this custome might arise,
which we observe so religiously, that we are more sharpely offended
with the reproach of this vice, so ordinary in us, than with any
other; and that it is the extremest injury may be done us in words, to
upbraid and repoach us with a lie.  Therein I find that it is naturall
for a man to defend himselfe most from such defects as we are most
tainted with.  It seemeth that if we but shew a motion of revenge, or
are but moved at the accusation, we in some sort discharge ourselves
of the blame of imputation; if we have it in effect, at least we
condemne it in apparance.  May it not also be that this reproch seemes
to enfold cowardice and faintnesse of hart?  Is there any more
manifest than for a man to eate and deny his owne word?  What, to deny
his word wittingly. To lie+ is a horrible filthy vice; and which an
ancient writer setteth forth very shamefully, when he saith that
whosoever lieth witnesseth that he contemneth God and therewithall
feareth men.  It is impossible more richly to represent the horrour,
the vilenesse and the disorder of it: for, what can be imagined so
vile and base as to be a coward towards men and a boaster towards God?
Our intelligence being onely conducted by the way of the word: whoso
falsifieth the same betraieth publike society.  It is the only
instrument by meanes whereof our wils and thoughts are communicated:
it is the interpretour of our soules: If that faile us, we hold our
selves no more, we enter-know one another no longer.  If it deceive
us, it breaketh al our commerce, and dissolveth al bonds of our
policies.  Certaine Nations of the new Indiaes (whose names we need
not declare, because they are no more, for the desolation of this
conquest hath extended it selfe to the absolute abolishing of names
and ancient knowledge of places, with a marvellous and never the like
heard example) {colonialism+} offered humane blood unto their Gods,
but no other than that which was drawne from their tongues and eares
for an expiation of the sinne of lying as well heard as
pronounced. That good fellow Graecian said children were dandled with
toies, but men with words.  Concerning the sundry fashions of our
giving the lie, and the lawes of our honour in that and the changes
they have received, I wil refer to another time to speake what I
thinke and know of it, and if I can I will in the meane time learne at
what time this custome tooke his beginning, so exactly to weigh and
precisely to measure words, and tie our honour to them: for it is
easie to judge that it was not anciently amongst the Romans and
Graecians.  And I have often thought it strange to see them wrong and
give one another the lie, and yet never enter into quarrell.  The
lawes of their duty tooke some other course than ours.  Caesar is
often called a thiefe, and sometimes a drunkard to his face.  We see
the liberty of their invectives, which they write one against another:
I meane the greatest Chieftaines and Generals in war, of one and other
nation, where words are onely retorted and revenged with words, and
never wrested to further consequence.

CHAPTER 2.XIX+ OF THE LIBERTY OF CONSCIENCE

IT is ordinarily seene how good intentions, being managed without
moderation, thrust men into most vicious effects.  In this
controversie, by which France is at this instant molested with eivill
warres, the best and safest side is no doubt that which maintained
both the ancient religion and policy of the country.  Neverthelesse
amongst the honest men that follow it (for my meaning is not to speake
of those who use them as a colour, either to exercise their particular
revenges, or to supply their greedy avarice, or to follow the favour
of Princes: but of such as do it with a true zeale towards their
religion, and an unfained holy affection, to maintaine the peace and
uphold the state of their country), of those I say divers are seene,
whome passion thrusts out of the bounds of reason, and often forceth
them to take and follow unjust, violent and rash counsels.  Certaine
it is, that when first our religion began to gaine authority with the
lawes, its zeale armed many against all sorts of Pagane bookes,
whereof the learned sort have a great losse.  My opinion is that this
disorder hath done more hurt to learning than all the Barbarian
flames.  Cornelius Tacitus is a sufficient testimonie of it, for,
howbeit the Emperor Tacitus his kinsman had by expresse appointment
stored all the libraries in the world with it, notwithstanding one
onely entire copy could not escape the curious search of those who
sought to abolish it, by reason of five or sixe vaine clauses contrary
to our beleefe.  They have also had this easily to affoord false
commendations to all the Emperours, that made for us, and universally
to condemne al the actions of those which were our adversaries, as may
plainly be seene in Julian the Emperor, surnamed the Apostate; who in
truth was a notable- rare-man, as he whose mind was lively endowed
with the discourses of Philosophy, unto which he professed to conforme
all his actions; and truely there is no kinde of vertue whereof he
hath not left most notable examples.  In chastity (whereof the whole
course of his life giveth a parant testimony) a like example unto that
of Alexander and Scipio is read of him, which is, that of many
wonderfull faire captive ladies brought before him, being even in the
very prime of his age (for he was slain by the Parthians about the age
of one and thirty yeares) he would not see one of them.  Touching
justice, himselfe would take the paines to heare all parties: and
although for curiosity sake, he would enquire of such as came before
him what religion they were of, nevertables the enmitie he bare to
ours did no whit weigh downe the ballance. Himselfe made sundrie good
lawes, and revoked diverse subsidies and impositions, his
predecessours before him had receaved.  We have two good historians as
eye witnesses of his actions.  One of which (who is Marcellinus) in
sundry places of his historie bitterly reprooveth this ordinance of
his, by which he forbade schooles and interdicted all Christian
rhetoricians and grammarians to teacb, saying he wished this his
action might be buried under silence. It is very likely, if he had
done anything else more sharpe or severe against us, he would not have
forgot it, as he that was well affected to our side. Hee was indeede
very severe against us, yet not a cruell enemy.  For, our people
themselves report this historie of him that walking one day about the
city of Calcedon Maris, Bishop thereof, durst call him wicked and
traitor to Christ, to whom be did no other thing but answered thus:
'Goe, wretched man, weepe and deplore the losse of thine eyes;' to
whom the Bishop replied: 'I thank Jesus Christ that be hath deprived
me of my sight, that so I might not view thy impudent face;' affecting
therby (as they say) a kind of Philosophicall patience.  So it is this
part cannot be referred to the cruelties which he is said to have
exercised against us.  He was (saith Eutropius, my other testimony) an
enemy unto Christianity, but without shedding of bloud.  But to
returne to his justice, he can be accused of nothing but of the rigors
he used in the beginning of his Empire, against such as had followed
the faction of Constantius, his predecessour.  Concerning sobriety, he
never lived a souldiers kinde of life, and in time of peace would feed
no otherwise than the one who prepared and enured himselfe to the
austeritie of war.  Such was his vigilancie that he divided the night
into three or foure parts, the least of which he allotted unto sleepe;
the rest he employed in visiting the state of his army and his guards,
or in study, for, amongst other his rare qualities, he was most
excellent in al sorts of learning.  It is reported of Alexander the
Great, that being laid downe to rest, fearing lest sleep should divert
him from his thoughts and studies, he caused a bason to be set neere
his bed side, and holding one of his hands out, with a brazen ball in
it, that, if sleep should surprise him, loosing his fingers ends, the
ball falling into the bason, might with the noyse rouse him from out
his sleep.  This man had a mind so bent to what he undertook, and by
reason of his singular abstinence so little troubled with vapours,
that he might well have past this devise.  Touching military
sufficiencie he was admirable in all parts belonging to a great
Captaine.  So was he almost al his life time in continual exercise of
war, and the greater part with us in France against the Almains and
Franconians.  Wee have no great memory of any man that either hath
seen more dangers, nor that more often hath made triall of his person.
His death hath some affinitie with that of Epaminondas, for being
strucken with an arrow, and attempting to pull it out, he had surely
done it, but that being sharpe-cutting, it hurt and weakened his hand.
In that plight he earnestly requested to be carryed forth in the
middest of his army, that so he might encourage his souldiers, who
without him courageously maintained the battel, until such time as
darke night severed the armies he was beholding to philosophie for a
singular contempt, both of himselfe and of all humane things.  He
assuredly believed the eternitie of soules.  In matters of religion,
he was vicious everywhere.  He was surnamed Apostata, because he had
forsaken ours; notwithstanding, this opinion seemes to mee more
likely, that he never took it to heart, but that for the obedience
which he bare to the law he dissembled til he had gotten the empire
into his hands.  He was so superstitious in his, that even such as
lived in his time, and were of his owne religion, mocked him for it;
and it was said that if he had gained the victory of the Parthians, he
would have consumed the race or breede of oxen to satisfie his
sacrifices.  He was also besotted with the art of soothsaying, and
gave authority to all manner of prognostikes.  Amongst other things he
spake at his death, he said he was much beholding to the Gods, and
greatly thanked them that they had not suffered him to be slain
sodainly or by surprize as having long before warned him both of the
place and houre of his end; nor to die of a base and easie death, more
beseeming idle and effeminate persons, nor of a lingering,
languishing, and dolorous death; and that they had deemed him worthy
to end his life so nobly in the course of his victories and in the
flower of his glory.  There had before appeared a vision unto him,
like unto that of Marcus Brutus, which first threatened him in Gaule,
and afterward even at the point of his death presented it selfe to him
in Persia.  The speach he is made to speak when he felt himselfe hurt,
'Thou hast vanquished, O Nazarean,' or; as some will have it, 'Content
thy selfe, O Nazarean,' would scarce have beene forgotten, had it
beene believed of my testimonies, who being present in the army, have
noted even the least motions and words at his death, no more than
certaine other wonders which they annex unto it.  But to return to my
theame, he had long before (as saith Marcellinus) hatched Paganisme in
his hart, but forsomuch as he saw al those of his armie to be
Christians, he durst not discover himselfe.  In the end, when he found
himselfe to be sufficiently strong, and durst publish his minde, he
caused the Temples of his Gods to be opened, and by all meanes
endeavoured to advance idolatrie.  And to attaine his purpose, having
found in Constantinople the people very loose, and at ods with the
Prelates of the Christian Church, and caused them to appeare before
him in his pallace, he instantly admonished them to appease all their
civill dissentions, and every one withotu hindrance or feare apply
themselves to follow and serve religion.  Which he very carefully
solicited, hoping this licence might encrease the factions and
controversies of the division, and hinder the people from growing to
any unity, and by consequence from fortifying themselves against him
by reason of their concord and in one mind-agreeing intelligence:
having by the cruelty of some Christians found that 'there is no beast
in the world so much of man to be feared as man,' {Yahoo+} loe, here
his very words, or very neare: wherewith this is worthy consideration,
that the Emperor Julian useth the same receipt of libertie of
conscience, to enkindle the trouble of civill dissention, which our
Kings employ to extinguish.  It may be said on one side that, to give
faction the bridle to entertaine their opinion is to scatter
contention and sow division, and as it were to lend it a hand to
augment and encrease the same: there being no barre or obstacle of
lawes to bridle or hinder his course.  But on the other side it might
also be urged that to give factions the bridle to uphold their
opinion, is by that facilitie and ease the readie way to mollifie and
release them, and to blunt the edge which is sharpned by rareness,
novelties and difficultie.  And if for the honour of our Kings
devotion, I believe better it is that since they could not doe as they
would, they have fained to will what they could not.

  CHAPTER 2.XX+ WE TASTE NOTHING PURELY

THE weaknes of our condition causeth that things in their naturall
simplicitie and puritie cannot fall into our use.  The elements we
enjoy are altered: metals likewise, yea gold, must be empaired with
some other stuffe to make it fit for our service.  Nor vertue so
simple which Ariston, Pyrrho, and Stoikes made the end of their life,
hath been able to doe no good without composition: nor the Cirenaike
sensualitie or Aristipian voluptuousness. 'Of the pleasures and goods
we have, there is none exempted from some mixture of evill and
incommoditie.


  ----- medio de fonte leporum

  Surgit amari aliquid, quod in ipsis floribus angat./1


  From middle spring of sweetes some bitter springs,

  Which in the very flower smartly stings.

Our exceeding voluptuousnesse hath some aire of groning and
wailing. Would you not say it dieth of anguish?  Yea, when we forge
its image in hir excellencie, we deck it with epithets of sickish and
dolorous qualities: languor, effeminacy, weaknesse, fainting and
morbidezza, a great testimony of their consanguinity and
consubtantiality.  Excessive joy hath more severity then jolity:
extreme and full content more settlednes then cheerfulnesse.  Ipsa
faelicitas, so nisi temperat, premit:/2 XXXXFelicitie it selfe,
unlesse it temper it selfe, distempers us.'  Ease consumeth us.  It is
that which an old Greek verse saith of such a sense: 'The Gods sell us
all the goods they give us:' that is to say they give us not one pure
and perfect, and which we buy

----- 1 LUCR. 1. iv. 12, 24. 2 SENT.  Quaere, &c.

not with the price of some evill.  Travail and pleasure, most unlike
in nature, are notwithstanding followed together by a kind of I wot
not what natural conjunction.  Socrates saith that some God attempted
to huddle together and confound sorrow and voluptuousnesse: but being
unable to effect it, he bethought himselfe to couple them together, at
least by the taile. Metrodorus said that in sadnesse there is some
aloy of pleasure. {wdswth+} I knowe not whether he meant any thing
else, but I imagine that for one to enure himselfe to melancholy,
there is some kinde of purpose of consent and muttull delight: I meane
besides ambition, which may also be joyned unto it.  There is some
shadow of delicacy and quaintnesse which smileth and fawneth upon us
even in the lap of melancholy.  Are there not some complexions that of
it make their nourishment?

  ----- est quaedam flere voluptas./1

  It is some pleasure yet


  With teares our cheekes to wet.

  And one Attalus in Seneca saith the remembrance of our last friends
  is as pleasing to us as bitternesse in wine that is over old.

  Minister veteris puer falerni

  Ingere mi calices amariores:/2

  Sir boy, my servitor of good old wine,

  Bring me my cup thereof, bitter, but fine.

And as of sweetly-sower apples, nature discovereth this confusion unto
us: painters are of opinion that the motions and wrinkles in the face
which serve to weepe serve also to laugh.  Verily before one or other
be determined to expresse which, behold the pictures success, you are
in doubt toward which one enclineth.  And the extreamity of laughing
entermingles it selfe with teares.  Nullum sine auctoramento malum
est:/3 'There is no evill without some obligation.'  When I

----- 1 OVID.  Trist. 1. iv.  Eleg. iii. 37. 2 CAT.  Lyr.
Eleg. xxiv. 1. 3 SEN. Epig. lxix.

imagine man fraught with all the commodities may be wished, let us
suppose all his severall members were for ever possessed with a
pleasure like unto that of generation, even in the highest point that
may be: I finde him to sinke under the burden of his ease, and
perceive him altogether unable to beare so pure, so constant, and so
universall a sensuality.  Truely he flies when he is even upon the
nicke, and naturally hasteneth to escape it, as from a step whereon he
cannot stay or containe himselfe, and feareth to sinke into it.  When
I religiously confesse my selfe unto my selfe, I finde the best good I
have hath some vicious taint.  And I feare that Plato in his purest
vertue (I that am as sincere and loyall an esteemer thereof, and of
the vertues of such a stampe, as any other can possibly be) if he had
neerely listened unto it (and sure he listened very neere) he would
therein have heard some harsh tune of humane mixture, but an obscure
tune, and onely sensible unto himselfe.  Man all in all is but a
botching and party coloured worke.  The very lawes of Justice can not
subsist without some commixture of injustice.  And Plato saith they
undertake to cut off Hidraes heads that pretend to remove all
incommodities and inconveniences from the lawes .  Omne magnum
exemplum habet aliquid ex iniquo, quod contra singulos utilitate
publica rependitur:/1 'Every great example hath some touch of
injustice which is requited by the common good against particulars,'
saith Tacitus.  It is likewise true that for the use of life and
service of publike society there may be excesse in the purity and
perspicuity of our spirits.  This piercing brightnes hath overmuch
subtility and curiositie. They should be made heavy and dull io make
them the more obedient to example and practice, and they must be
thickned and obscured to proportion them to this shady and
terrestriall life.  Therefore are vulgar and lesse wire drawne wits
found to be more fit and happy in the conduct of affaires. And the
exquisite and high-raised opinions of Philosophy unapt and unfit to

----- 1 TACIT.  Ann. 1. xiv.  Cassi.

exercise.  This Sharpe vivacity of the spirit, and this supple and
restlesse volubility troubleth our negotiations.  Humane enterprises
should be managed more grosely and superficially, and have a good and
great part of them left for the rights of fortune.  Affaires need not
be sifted so nicely and so profoundly.  A man looseth himselfe about
the considerations of so many contrary lustres and diverse formes.
Volutantibus res inter se pugnantes, obtorpuerant animi:/1 'Their
mindes were astonished while they revolved things so different.' It is
that which our elders report of Simonides; because his imagination
concerning the question Hieron the King had made unto him (which the
better to answer he had diverse dayes allowed him to thinke of it)
presented sundry subtil and sharpe considerations unto him; doubting
which might be the likeliest; he altogether dispaireth of the truth.
Whosoever searcheth all the circumstances and embraceth all the
consequences thereof hindereth his election.  A meane engine doth
equally conduct and sufficeth for the executions of great and little
weights.  It is commonly seene that the best husbands and the
thriftiest are those who cannot tell how they are so: and that these
cunning arithmeticians doe seldome thrivebyit.  I know a notable
pratler and an excellent blasoner of all sorts of husbandry and thrift
who hath most pitteously let ten thousand pound sterling a yeare passe
from him.  I know another who saith he consulteth better than any man
of his counsell, and there cannot be a properer man to see unto or of
more sufficiencie; notwithstanding, when be commeth to any execution,
his owne servants finde he is far otherwise: this I say without
mentioning or accounting his ill lucke.

----- 1 LIV.  Dec. iv. 1. ii.

CHAPTER 2.XXI+ AGAINST IDLENESSE, OR DOING NOTHING


THE Emperour Vespasian, lying sicke of the disease whereof he died,
omitted not to endeavour to understand the state of the empire; and
lying in his bed, uncessantly dispatched many affaires of great
consequence; and his physicians chiding him, as of a thing hurtfull of
his health, he answered that an Emperour should die standing
upright. {Lear+} Loe heere a notable saying, fitting my humour, and
worthy a great prince.  Adrian the Emperour used the same afterward to
like purpose.  And Kings ought often to be put in minde of it, to make
them feele that this great charge which is given them of the
commandement over so many men is no idle charge: and that there is
nothing may so justly distaste a subject from putting himselfe in
paine and danger for the service of his Prince then therewhilst to see
him given to lazinesse, to base and vaine occupations, and to have
care of his conservation, seeing him so carelesse of ours. {Lear+} If
any shall go about to maintaine that it is better for a Prince to
manage his wars by others then by himself.  Fortune will store him
with sufficient examples of those whose lieutenants have achieved
great enterprises, and also of some whose presence would have been
more hurtfull then profitable.  But no vertuous and coragious Prince
will endure to be entertained with so shame-full instructions.  Under
colour of preserving his head (as the statue of a Saint) for the good
fortune of his estate, they degrade him of his office, which is
altogether in military+ actions, and declare him uncapable of it.  I
know one would rather choose to be beaten then sleepe whilst others
fight for him; and who without jealousie never saw his men performe
any notable act in his absence.  And Selim the first had reason to say
that he thought victories gotten in the masters absence not to be
complete.  So much more willingly would he have said that such a
master ought to blush for shame, who onely by his name should pretend
any share in it, having thereunto employed nothing but his thought and
verbal direction. Nor that since in such a busines the advices and
commandements which bring honour are only those given in the field and
even in the action.  No Pilot exerciseth his office standing still.
The Princes of Otomans race (the chiefest race in the world in warlike
fortune) have earnestly embraced this opinion.  And Baiazeth the
second, with his sonne, who, ammusing themselves about sciences and
other private home matters, neglected the same, gave diverse
prejudiciall blowes unto their Empire.  And Amurath the third of that
name, who now raigneth, following their example, beginneth very wel to
feele their fortunes.  Was it not the King of England, Edward the
third, who spake these words of our King Charles the fifth: 'There was
never King that lesse armed himselfe; and yet Was never King that gave
me so much so doe, and put me to so many plunges.  He had reason to
thinke it strange, as an effect of fortune, rather than of reason.
And let such as will number the Kings of Castile and Portugall amongst
the warlike and magnanimous conquerors, seeke for some other adherent
then my selfe, forsomuch as twelve hundred leagues from their idle
residence they have made themselves masters of both Indias, onely by
the conduct and direction of their factors, of whom it would be knowne
whether they durst but goe and enjoy them il person. The Emperour
lulian said moreover that a Philosopher and gallant minded man ought
not so much as breathe; that is to say, not to give corporall
necessities, but what may not be refused them; ever holding both minde
and bodie busied about notable, great and vertuous matters.  He was
ashamed any man should see him spitte or sweate before people (which
is also said of the Lacedemonian youths, and Xenophon reporteth it of
the Persian) forsomuch as he thought that continuall travell,
exercise, and sobriety should have concocted and dried up all such
superfluities.  What Seneca saith shall not impertinently be alleadged
here; that the ancient Romans kept their youth upright, and taught
their children nothing that was to be learned sitting.  It is a
generous desire to endevor to die both profitable and manlike: but the
effect consisteth not so much in our good resolution, as in our good
fortune.  A thousand have resolved to vanquish or to die fighting,
which have missed both the one and other: Hurts or imprisonment
crossing their desseigne and yeelding them a forced kinde of life.
There are diseases which vanquish our desires and knowledge.  Fortune
should not have seconded the vanitie of the Romane Legions, who by
oath bound themselves either to die or conquer.  Victor, Marce Fabi,
revertur ex acie: Si fallo, Iovem patrem Gradinumque Martem aliosque
iratos invoco Deos:/1 'I will, O Marcus Fabius, returne conqueror from
the armie.  If in this I deceive you, I wish both great Iupiter and
Mars, and t he other Gods offended with me.' The Portugalles report
that in certain places of their Indian conquests they found some
souldiers who with horrible execrations had damned themselves never to
enter into any composition, but either they would be killed or remaine
victorious; and in signe of their vowe wore their heads and beards
shaven.  We may hazard and obstinate our selves long enough.  It
seemeth that blowes shunne them who over-joyfully present themselves
unto them; and unwillingly reach those that overwillingly goe to meet
them and corrupt their end.  Some unable to lose his life by his
adversaries force, having assaid all possible meanes, hath been
enforced to accomplish his resolution, either to beare away the
honour, or not to carry away his life, and even in the fury of the
fight to put himselfe to death.  There are sundrie examples of it,

----- 1 Liv.  Doc. i. 1. ii.

but note this one.  Philistus, chiefe Generall of yong Dionysius his
navie against the Siracusans, presented them the battle, which was
very sharply withstood, their forces being alike; wherein by reason of
his prowesse he had the better in the beginning.  But the Siracusans
flocking thicke and threefold about his gally to grapple_and board
him, having performed many worthy exployts with his owne person to
ridde himselfe from them, dispairing of all escape, with his owne hand
deprived himselfe of that life which so lavishly and in vaine he had
abandoned to his enemies hands. Moly Moluch, King of Fez, who not long
since obtained that famous victory against Sebastian, King of
Portugall, a notable victorie by reason of the death of three Kings,
and transmission of so great a Kingdome to the crowne of Castile,
chanced to be grievously sicke at what time the Portugales with armed
hand entred his dominions, and afterwards, though he foresaw it
approaching nearer unto death, empaired worse and worse.  Never did
man more stoutly or more vigorously make use of an undanted courage
than he. He found himselfe very weake to endure the ceremonious pompe
which the Kings of that country, at their entrance into the camp are
presented withall, which according to their fashion is full of all
magnificence and state, and charged with all manner of action; and
therefore he resigned that honour to his brother, yet resigned he
nothing but the office of the chiefe Captaine. Himselfe most
gloriously executed and most exactly perfourmed all other necessary
duties and profitable offices: holding his body laid along his cowch,
but his minde upright and courage constant, even to his last gasp and
in some sort after. {Lear+} He might have undermined his enemies, who
were fond-hardily advanced in his dominions, and was exceedingly
grieved that for want of a little longer life and a substitute to
manage the warre and affaires of so troubled a State, he was enforced
to seeke a bloody and hazardous battel, having another pure and
undoubted victory in hand. He notwithstanding managed the continuance
of his sicknesse so miraculously that he consumed his enemy, diverted
him from his sea-fleete and maritime places he held along the coast of
Affricke, even untill the last day of his life, which by designe he
reserved and employed for so great and renowned a fight.  He ranged
his battel in a round, on every side besieging the Portugals army,
which bending round and coming close, did not onely hinder them in the
conflict of (which through the valour of that yong assailant King was
very furious), since they were were to turnee their faces on all
sides, but also hindred them from running away after the rowte.  And
finding all issues seized, and all passages closed, they were
constrained to turne upon themselves: Coacervantur que non solum cede,
sed etiam fuga: 'They fall on heapes not only by slaughter but by
flight:' And so pel mell to heape on one anothers necke, preparing a
most murtherous and compleate victory for the conquerors.  When he was
even dying he caused himselfe to be carryed and haled where-ever neede
called for him; and passing along the files he exhorted the captaines
and animated the souldiers one after another.  And seeing one wing of
the light to have the worst, and in some danger, no man could hold
him, but he would needs, with his naked sword in hand, get on hors-
backe striving by all possible meanes to enter the throng, his men
holding him some by the bridle, some by the gowne, and some by the
stirrops.  This toyle and straining of himselfe made an end of that
Iittle remainder of his life; then was he laid on his bed: but comming
to himselfe again, starting up as out of a swown, each other faculty
failing him, he gave them warning to conceale his death (which was the
necessariest commandement he could give his servants, lest the
souldiers, bearing of his death, might fall into despaire) and so
yeelded the Ghost, holding his fore-fingers upon his mouth, an
ordinary signall to impose silence.  What man ever lived so long and
so neere death?  Who ever died so upright and undaunted?  The
extreamest degree, and most naturall, courageously to manage death+,
is to see or front the same, not onely without amazement, but without
care; the course of life continuing free even in death.  As Cato, who
ammused himselfe to studie and sleepe, having a violent and bloudy
death present in his heart, and as it were holding it in his hand.

CHAPTER 2.XXII+ OF RUNNING POSTS, OR COURIERS


I HAVE been none of the weakest in this exercise, which is proper unto
men of my stature, well-trussed, short and tough, but now I have given
it over: it toyles us over-much to hold out long.  I was even now
reading how King Cyrus, that he might more speedily receave news from
al parts of his Empire (which was of exceeding great length), would
needs have it tried how far a horse could in a day goe outright
without baiting, at which distance he caused stations to be set up,
and men to have fresh horses ready for al such as came to him.  And
some report this swift kind of running answereth the flight of cranes.
Caesar saith that Lucius Vibullis Rufus, making hast to bring Pompey
an advertisement, rode day and night, and to make more speed shifted
many horses.  And himselfe (as Suetonius writeth) would upon an hyred
coache runne a hundred miles a day.  And sure he was a rancke-runner:
for where any river hindred his way he swam it over, and never went
out of his way to seek for a bridge or foard.  Tiberius Nero going to
visite his brother Drusus who lay sick in Germanie, having three
coaches in his company, ranne two hundred miles in foure and twenty
houres.  In the Romane warres against King Antiochus, Titus Sempronius
Gracchus (saith Titus Livius) per dispositos equos prope incredibili
celeritate ab Anmphisa tertio die Pellam pervenit:/1 'By horse laid
poste, with incredible speede within three dayes he past from Amphisa
to Pella.'  And viewing the place, it seemeth they were set stations
for postes, and not newly

----- 1 LIVUS.

appointed for that race.  The invention of Cecina in sending newes to
those of his house had much more speede; he carried certaine swallowes
with him, and having occasion to send newes home, he let them flie
toward their nests, first marking them with some colour proper to
signifie what he meant, as before he had agreed upon with his friends.
In the theaters of Rome the household masters carried pigeons in their
bosomes, under whose wings they fastened letters, when they would send
any word home, which were also taught to bring back an answer.  D.
Brutus used some, being besieged in Mutina, and others elsewhere.  In
Peru they went poste upon mens backes, who tooke theire masters upon
their shoulders, sitting upon cerfaine beares or chaires with such
agilitie that, in full running speede, the first porters, without any
stay, cast their load upon other who upon the way waited for them, and
so they to others.  I understand that the Valachians, which are
messengers unto the great Turk, use extreame diligence in their
businesses forasmuch as they have authoritie to dismount the first
passengers they meet upon the high-way, and give him their tyred
horse.  And because they shal not be weary, they are wont to swaithe
themselves hard about the bodie with a broad swathe or seare-cloth, as
diverse others doe with us: I cold never finde ease or good by it.

CHAPTER 2.XXIII+ OF BAD MEANES EMPLOIED TO A GOOD END THERE

is a wonderfull relation and correspondencie found in this universall
policie of Natures workes, which manifestly sheweth it is neither
casual nor directed by diverse masters.  The infirmities and
conditions of our bodies are likewise seene in states and governments:
kingdomes and commonwealths as well as we, are borne, florish, and
fade through age.  We are subject unto a repleatnesse of humours,
hurtfull and unprofitable, yea be it of good humours (for even
physitians feare that, and because there is nothing constant in
us;. they say, that perfection of health, over joyful and strong, must
by art be abated and diminished, lest our nature, unable to settle it
selfe in any certaine place, and for hir amendment to ascend higher,
should over-violently recoile backe into disorder; and therefore they
prescribe unto wrestlers purging and phlebotomies to subtract that
superabundance of health from them or of bad [?????] which is the
ordinary cause of sicknesse. Of such like repletion are states often
seene to be sicke, and divers purgations are wont to be used to purge
them.  As wee have seene some to dismisse a great number of families
(chiefly to disburthen the country) which elsewhere goe to seeke where
they may at others charge seat themselves.  In this sorte our ancient
French, leaving the high countries of Germanic, came to possesse
Gaule, whence they displaced the first inhabitants.  Thence grew that
infinite confluence of people which afterward, under Brenus and
others, overranne Italie.  Thus the Gothes and Vandalls, as also the
nations which possesse Greece, left their naturall countries to go
where they might have more elbow-roome: and hardly shall we see two or
three corners in the world that have not felt the effect of such a
remooving alteration.  The Romanes, by such meanes, erected their
colonies; for, perceiving their citie to growe over-populous, they
were wont to discharge it of unnecessary people, which they sent to
inbabite and manure the countries they had subdued.  They have also
sometimes maintainedwarre+ with some of their enemies, not onely
thereby to keepe their men in breath, lest idleness, the mother of
corruption, should cause them some inconvenience.

  Et patimur longae pacis mala, saevior armis

  Luxuria incumbit./1

  We suffer of long peace the soking harmes,

  On us lies luxury more fierce then armes.

But also to let the Common-wealth bloud and somewhat to allay the over
vehement heat of their youth, to lop the sprigs and thin the branches
of this over-spreading tree, too much abounding in ranknesse and
gaillardise.  To this purpose they maintained a good while war with
the Carthaginians.  In the treaty of Bretigny, Edward the Third, King
of England, would by no meanes comprehend in that general peace the
controversie of the Dutchie of Britany, to the end he might have some
way to disburthen himselfe of his men of war, and that the multitude
of English-men which he had emploied about the warres of France should
not returne into England. It was one of the reasons induced Philip our
king to consent that his sonne John should be sent to warre beyond the
seas, that so he might carry with him a great number of yong
hot-blouds which were amongst his trained military men.  There are
divers now adaies, which will speake thus, wishing this violent and
burning emotion we see and feele amongst us might be derived to some
neighbor warre, fearing lest those offending humours, which at this
instant are predominant in our bodie,

----- 1 Juv.  Sat. vi. 192.

if they be not diverted elsewhere, will still maintaine our fever in
force, and in the end cause our utter destruction: And in truth a
forraine warre is nothing so dangerous a disease as a civill: But I
will not beleeve that God would favour so unjust an enterprise, to
offend and quarrell with others for our commodity.

  Nil mihi tam valde placeat Rhamnusia virgo,

  Quod temere invitis suscipiatur heris./1

  That fortune likes me not which is constrained

  By Lords unwilling rashly entertained.


Notwithstanding the weaknesse of our condition, doth often urge us to
this necessity, to use bad meanes to a good end.  Lycurgus, the most
vertuous and perfect law-giver that ever was, devised this most unjust
fashion, to instruct his people unto temperance, by force to make the
Helotes, which were their servants, to be drunken that seeing them so
lost and buried in wine, the Spartanes might abhor the excesse of that
vice.  Those were also more to be blamed, who anciently allowed that
criminall offenders what death soever they were condemned unto, should
by physitians all alive be torne in pieces, that so they might
naturally see our inward parts, and thereby establish a more assured
certainty in their art: for if a man must needes erre or debauch
himselfe, it is more excusable if he doe it for his soules health then
for his bodies good.  As the Romans trained up and instructed their
people to valour, and contempt of dangers and death, by the outragious
spectacles of gladiators and deadly fighting fencers, who in presence
of them all combated, mangled, sliced, and killed one another.

  Quid vesani aliud sibi vult ars impia ludi,

  Quid mortes iuvenum, quid sanguine pasta voluptas?

  What else meanes that mad art of impious senseimpious sense,

  Those yong-mens deaths, that bloud-fed pleasing sense?

  Which custome continued even untill the time of Theodosius the
  Emperour.


----- 1 CAT.  Epig.  Eleg. iv. 77.

  Arripe delatam tua dux in tempora famam,

  Quodque patris superest successor laudis habeto:

  Nullus in vrbe cadat, cujus sit poena voluptas,

  Iam solis contenta feris infamis arena,

  Nulla cruentatis homicidia ludat in armis./1

  The fame defer'd to your times entertaine,

  Enherite praise which doth from Sire remaine

  Let none die to give pleasure by his paine:

  Be shamefull Theaters with beasts content

  Not in goar'd armes manslaughter represent.

Surely it was a wonderfull example, and of exceeding benefit for the
peoples institution, to see dayly one or two hundred, yea sometimes a
thousand brace of men, armed one against another, in their presence to
cut and hacke one another in pieces with so great constancy of
courage, that they were never seene to utter one word of faintnes or
commiseration, never to turne their backe, nor so much as to shew a
motion of demissenesse, to avoide their adversaries blowes: but rather
to extend their necks to their swords, and present themselves unto
their strokes. It hath hapned to diverse of them, who through many
hurts being wounded to death, have sent to ask the people whether they
were satisfied with their duty, before they would lie down in the
place.  They must not only fight and die constantly, but jocondly: in
such sort as they were cursed and bitterly scolded at, if in receiving
their death they were any way seene to strive, yea madnesse encited
them to it.


  -----consurgit ad ictus,

  Et quot

  ies victor ferrum iugulo inserit, illa


  Delicias ait esse suas, pectusque jacentis

  Virgo modesta ubet converso pollice rumpi./2

  The modest maide, when wounds are given, upriseth;

  When victors sword the vanquisht throate surpriseth,

  She saith, it is hir sport, and doth command

  T'embrue the conquer'd breast, by signs of hand.

The first Romans disposed thus of their criminals: but afterward they
did so with their innocent servants;

----- 1 PRUD.  Tost.  Sym. 1. ii. f. 2 PRUD.  Cont.  Sym. 1. ii.

  yea, of their free men, which were sold to that purpose: yea of
  Senators, and Roman Knights and women also.

  Nunc caput in mortem vendant, et funus arenae,

  Atque hostem sibi quisqe parat cum bella quiescunt./1

  They sell mens lives to death and stages sight,

  When wars do cease, they finde with whom to fight.

  Hos inter fremitus novosque lusus,

  Stat sexus rudis insciusque ferri.

  Et puguas capit improbus viriles:

  Amidst these tumults, these strange sporting sights,

  That sex doth sit which knowes not how sword bites,

  And entertaines unmov'd those manly fights.

Which I should deem very strange and incredible; if we were not dayly
accustomed to see in our wars many thousands of foreigne nations, for
a very small sum of mony, to engage both their blood and life in
quarrels wherein they are nothing interested.

----- MANIL.  Ast. 1. iv. 2, 4.

CHAPTER 2.XXIV+ OF THE ROMAN GREATNESS

I WILL but speake a word of this infinite argument, and slightly
glance at it, to show the simplicitie of those who compare the seely
greatnesse of these times unto that.  In the seaventh booke of
Ciceroes familiar Epistles (and let Gramarians remove this title of
familiar if they please, for, to say truth, it makes but little to the
purpose: and they who in lieu of familiar have placed ad familiares,
may wrest some argument for themselves, from that which Suetonius
saith in Caesars Life, that there was a volume of his Epistles ad
familares) there is one directed unto Caesar then being in Gaule, in
which Caesar repeats these very words which were in the end a former
letter that Caesar had written to him: 'Touching Marcus Furius, whom
thou bast commended unto me, I will make him King of Gaule, and if
thou wilt have me preferre any other of thy friends, send them to me.
It was not new in a simple Roman citizen (as Caesar then was) to
dispose of kingdomes, for as well deprived he King Deiotarus of his,
to give it to a gentleman of the city of Pergamo, called Mithridates.
And those who writ his Life mention many kingdomes sold by him.  And
Suetonius reporteth that he at one time wrested three millions and
five hundred thousand crownes of gold from King Ptolomaeus, which
amounted very neere unto the price of his kingdome.

  Tot Galatae, tot Pontus est, tot Lydia numnis:/1

  Forsomuch let Galatia go,

  Forsomuch Lidia, Pontus so.


----- 1 CLAUD. in Eutrop. 1. i. 20, 3.

Marcus Antonius said, 'The greatnesse of the Romane people was not so
much discerned by what it tooke as by what it gave. {reciprocity+} Yet
some ages before Antonius was there one amongst others of so
wonderfull authoritie, as through all his history I know no marke
carrieth the name of his credit higher.  Antiochus possessed all
Egypt, and was very neere to conquer Cyprus and others depending of
that Empire.  Vpon the progresse of his victories, C.  Popilius came
unto him in the behalfe of the Senate, and at first arrivall refused
to take him by the hand before he had read the letters he brought him.
The King having read them, said he would deliberate of them.  Popilius
with a wand encireled the place about where he stood, and thus bespake
him: 'Give me an answer to carry back to the Senate before thou goest
out of this circle.  Antiochus, amazed at the rudenesse of so urging a
commandement, after he had paused a while, replyed thus: 'I will doe
what the Senat commandeth me.  Then Popilius saluted him as a friend
unto the Roman people. 'To have renounced so great a Monarchy and
forgon the course of so successfull prosperity by the only impression
of three written lines!  He had good reason, as afterward he did, by
his Ambassadors to send the Senate word that he had received their
ordinances with the same respect as if they had come from the
immortall Gods.  All the kingdomes Augustus subdued by right of war,
he restored to those who had lost them, or presented strangers with
them.  And concerning this purpose, Tacitus, speaking of Cogidunus,
King of England, by a wonderful trait makes us perceive this infinit
greatnes and might.  The Romans (saith he) were from all antiquity
accustomed to leave those kings whom they had vanquished in the
possession of their kingdomes under their authoritie: Vt haberent
instrumenta servitutis et reges:/1 'That they might have even Kings
also for instruments of their bondage.' It is very likely that
Soliman, the great Turke, whom we have seene to use such a liberality
and give away the Kinadome of

----- 1 CORN.  TACIT.  Vit.  Jul.  Agric.

Hungary and other dominions, did more respect this consideration then
that he was wont to alleage; which is, that he was over wearied with
the many monarchies and surcharged with the severall dominions, which
either his owne or his ancestors vertue had gotten him.

CHAPTER 2.XXV+ HOW A MAN SHOULD NOT COUNTERFEIT TO BE SICKE



THERE is an epigram in Martiall that may pass for a good one (for
there are of all sorts in him), wherein he pleasantly relateth the
storie of Caelius, who to avoide the courting of certaine great men in
Rome, to give attendance at their rising, and to waite, assist and
follow them, fained to be troubled with the goute; and to make his
excuse more likely, he caused his legges to be ointed and swathed and
lively counterfeted the behaviour and countenance of a goutie man.  In
the end fortune did him the favour to make him goutie indeede.

  Tantum cura potest et ars doloris,

  Desiit fingere Caelius podagram./1

  So much the care and cunning can of paine:

  Caelius (growne gowty) leaves the gowt to faine.

As farre as I remember I have read a like history in some place of
Appian, of one who, purposing to escape the proscriptions of the
Triumvirat of Rome, and to conceale himselfe from the knowledge of
those who pursued him, kept himselfe close and disguised, adding this
other invention to it, which was to counterfeit blindnes in one eye,
who when he came somewhat to recover his liberty, and would have left
off the plaster he had long time worne over his eyes, he found that
under that mask he had altogether lost the sight of it.  It may be the
action of his sight was weakned, having so long continued without
exercise and the usual vertue was wholly converted into the other eye.
For we may plainly perceive that holding one eye shut, it convaieth

----- 1 MART. 1. vii.  Epig. xxxviii. 8.

some part of its effect into his fellow; in such sort as it will swell
and grow bigger.  As also the idlenes, together with the warmth of the
medicaments and swathing, might very well draw some goutie humour into
the legge of Martials goutie fellow.  Reading in Froisart the vow
which a gallant troupe of younge English-men had made to weare their
eyes hudwinkt untill such time as they should passe into France, and
there performe some notable exploite of armes upon us: I have often
laughed with my selfe to think what they would have imagined if as to
the fore aleaged it had hapned to them, and had all beene blind of the
left eye at what time they turned to look upon their mistresses, for
whose sake they had made their vowe and undertaken such an enterprise.
Mothers have great reason to chide their children when they
counterfeit to be blind with one eye, crompt backe, squint-eyed, or
lame, and such other deformities of the body; for besides that the
body thus tender may easily receive some ill custome, I know not how,
it seemeth that fortune is glad to take us at our word: and I have
heard diverse examples of some who have fallen sicke in very deede
because they had purposed to faine sick.  I have at all times enured
my selfe, whether I be on horsebacke or afoote, to carry a good heavie
wand or cudgell in my hand; Yea, I have endeavoured to doe it
handsomely, and with an effected kinde of countenance to continue so.
Many have threatned me that fortune will one time or other turne this
my wantonnes into necessitie.  I presume upon this that I should be
the first of my race that ever was troubled with the gowt.  But lett
us somewhat amplifie this chapter, and patch it up with another piece
concerning blindnes.  Plinie reports of one who, dreaming in his
sleepe that he was blind, awaking the next morning, was found to be
starke blinde, having never had any precedent sickenes.  The power of
imagination may very well further such things as elsewhere I have
shewed; and Plinie seemeth to bee of this opinion; but it is more
likely that the motions which the body felt inwardly (whereof
Physitians may, if they please, finde out the cause), and which tooke
away his sight, were the occasion of his dreame.  Let us also add
another storie concerning this purpose, which Seneca reporteth in his
Epistles.  Thou knowest (saith he, writing unto Lucilius) that
Harpaste, my wifes foole, is left upon me as an hereditarie charge;
for by mine owne nature I am an enemie unto such monsters, and if I
have a desire to laugh at a foole, I neede not seeke one farre; I
laugh at my selfe.  This foolish woman hath sodainly lost her sight.
I report a strange thing, but yet very true.  She will not beleeve she
is blind, and urgeth her keeper uncessantly to lead her, saying still,
my house is very darke.  What we laugh at in her, I entreat thee to
beleeve that the same hapneth to each of us.  No man knoweth himselfe
to be covetous or niggardly.  Even the blinde require a guide, but wee
stray from our selves.  I am not ambitious, say we, but no man can
live otherwise at Rome: I am not sumptuous, but the citie requireth
great charges.  It is not my fault if I be collerike; if I have not
yet set downe a sure course of my life, the fault is in youth.  Let us
not seeke our evill out of us; it is within us, it is rooted in our
entrailes. {selfcrit+} And only because we perceive not that we are
sicke, makes our recoverie to prove more difficult.  If we beginne not
betimes to cure our selves, when shall we provide for so many sores,
for so many evils?  Yet have we a most sweete and gentle medicine of
Philosophy; for of others no man feeles the leasure of them but after
his recoveries whereas she pleaseth, easeth, and cureth all at once.
Lee here what Seneca saith, who hath some what diverted me from my
purpose: but there is profit in the exchange.

CHAPTER 2.XXVI+ OF THUMBS


TACITus reporteth that amongst certaine barbarous kings, for the
confirmation of an inviolable bonde or covenant, their manner was to
joyne their right bands close and hard together with enterlacing their
thumbs: and when by hard wringing them the blood appeared at their
ends, they pricked them with some sharp point, and then mutually
entersuckt each one the others. Phisicians say thumbes are the master
fingers of the hand, and that their Latine etymologie is derived of
Pollere.  The Graecians call it &VTtxelp, as a man would say, another
hand.  And it seemeth the Latines likewise take them sometimes in this
sense, id est, for the whole hand:

  Sed nec vocibus excitata blandis,

  Molli pollice nec rogata surgit./1

  It wil not rise, though with sweet words excited,

  Nor with the touch of softest thumb invited.

  In Rome it was heretofore a signe of favour to wring and kisse the
  thumbs:

  Fautor vtrogue tuum laudabit pollice ludum:/2

  He that applaudes will praise,

  With both his thumbs, thy plaies:


  and of disfavor or disgrace to lift them up and turne them outward.


  ----- converse pollice vulgi

  Quemlibet occidunt populariter./3


  When people turne their thumbs away,

  They popularly any slay.


----- 1 MART. 1. xii.  Epig. xcix. 8. 2 HOR. 1. i.
Epist. xviii. 66. 1 JUV. Sat. iii. 36.

Such as were hurt or maymed in their thumbs were by the Romans
dispensed from going to warre, as they who had lost their weapons
hold-fast.  Augustus did confiscate all the goods of a Roman knight,
who through malice had cut off the thumbes of two young children of
his, thereby to excuse them from going to warre and before him the
Senate in the time of the Italian warres had condemned Caius Vatienus
to perpetuall prison, and confiscated all his goods, forsomuch as he
had willingly cut off the thumb of his left hand, so to exempt
himselfe from the voyage. Some one, whose name I remember not, having
gained a great victory by sea, caused all the enemies whom he had
vanquished and taken prisoners to have their thumbs cut off, thinking
thereby to deprive them of all meanes of fighting, or rowing, or
handling their oares.  The Athenians likewise caused them to be cut
off from them of AEgina, to take from them the prebhminence in the art
of navigation.  Lacedaemon masters punished their schollers by byting
their thumbs.

CHAPTER 2.XXVII+ COWARDIZE THE MOTHER OF CRUELTY


I HAVE often heard it reported that cowardice is the mother of
cruelty: and have perceived by experience that this malicious sbarpnes
and inhumane severitie of corage is commonly accompanied with feminine
remissenesse. I have seene some of the cruelest subject to weepe
easily, and for frivolous causes.  Alexander the tyrant of Pheres
could not endure to see tragedies acted in the theatres for feare his
subjects should see him sob and weepe at the misfortunes of Hecuba and
Andromache; he who without remorse or pitty caused daily so many poore
people to be most cruelly massacred and barbarously murthered.  May it
be weaknesse of spirit makes them so pliable to all extremities? valor
(whose effect is onely to exercise it selfe against resistance),

  Nec nisi bellantis gaudet cervice iuvenci./1

  Nor takes he joy to domineere

  But on the necke of sturdie steere.

refraines it selfe in seeing her enemy prostrate to her mercy: but
pusillanimitie+, to say that she also is of the feaste, since it
cannot be joyned to the first part takes for her share the second,
which is massacre and blood. Murthers after victories are commonly
effected by the baser kinde of people and officers that waite upon the
baggage and cariage.  And the reason we see so many unheard-of
cruelies in popular warres is that this vulgar rascalitie doth
martially flesh and enure it selfe to dive in blood up to the elbowes,
and mangle a body,

----- 1 CLAUD.  Epist. ad Hadr. v. 89.

  or hacke a carcase lying and groveling at their feete, having no
  manner of feeling of other valor.

  Et Lupus et turpes instant morientibus Ursi.

  Et quaecumque minor nobilitate fera est./1

  A Wolfe or filthie Beare the dying man oppresse.

  Or some such beast as in nobilitle is lesse.

As the craven Curres, which at home or in their kennels will tugge and
bite the skins of those wilde beastes which in the fields they durst
not so much as bark at.  What is it that now adaies makes all our
quarrels mortall?  And whereas our forefathers had some degree of
revenge, we now beginne by the last; and at first brunt nothing is
spoken of but killing?  What is it, if it be not cowardice?  Every man
seeth it is more bravery and disdaine for one to beat his enemie than
make an end of him, and to keep him at a bay, then make him die.
Moreover, that the desire of revenge is thereby allayed and better
contented; for it aymeth at nothing so much as to give or shew a
motion or feeling of revenge onely of her self.  And thats the reason
we do not challenge a beast, or fall upon a stone when it hurts us,
because they are incapable to feele our revenge.  And to kill a man is
to shelter him from our offence.  And even as Bias exclaimed upon a
wicked man: 'I know that soone or late thou shalt be punished for thy
lewdness but I feare me I shall not see it;' and moaned the
Orchomenians, because the penance which Liciscus had for his treason
committed against them, came at such a time as none of them were
living whom it had concerned, and whom the pleasure of that punishment
might most delight so ought revenge to be moaned when he on whom it is
inflicted looseth the meanes to endure or feel it; For, even as the
revenger will see the action of the revenge, that so he may feel the
pleasure of it, so must he on whom he is revenged, both see and feele
that he man hereby receive both repentance and griefe.  He shall rew
it, say we.  And though he receive a stab, or a

----- 1 OVID.  Trist. 1. iii.  Eleg, v. 35.

blow with a pistol on his head, shal we think he wil repent?
Contrariwise, if we marke him wel, we shal perceive that in falling,
he makes a moe or bob at us.  He is farre from repenting when he
rather seemes to be beholding us: inasmuch as we affoord him the
favourablest office of life, which is to make him dye speedily and as
it were insensibly.  We are left to shift up and downe, runne and
trot, and squat heere and there, and al to avoyd the officers or
escape the magistrates that pursue us; and he is at rest. 'To kill a
man is good to escape a future offence, and not revenge the wrongs
past.  It is rather an action of feare than of bravery; of precaution
than of an enterprise.  It is apparent that by it we quit both the
true end of revenge and the respect of our reputation: if be live we
feare he will or may charge us with the like.  It is not against him,
it is for thee, thou riddest thy selfe of him.  In the kingdome of
Narsinga this expedient would be bootlesse.  There not only souldiers,
and such as professe armes, but every meane artificer, decide their
quarels with the swords point. The King never refuseth any man the
combate that is disposed to fight, and if they be men of qualitie he
wil be by in person, and reward the victor with a chaine of gold:
which, whosoever hath a mind unto, and wil obtaine it, may freely
challenge him that weareth the same, and enter combate with him.  And
having overcome one combate, hath many following the same.  If we
thought by vertue to be ever superiors unto our enemy, and at our
pleasure gourmandize him, it would much grieve us he should escape us,
as he doth in dying.  We rather endeavour to vanquish surely then
honourably.  And in our quarrels we rather seeke for the end then for
the glory.  Asinius Pollio for an honest man lesse excusabie,
committed a like fault; who, having written many invectives against
Plancus, staid untill he were dead to publish them.  It was rather to
flurt at a blind man, and raile in a dead mans eare, and to offend a
senselesse man, than incurre the danger of his revenge.  And men
answered in this behalfe, that it onely belonged to hobgoblins to
wrestle with the dead.  He who stayeth till the author be dead whose
writings he will combate, what saith he but that he is weake and
quarrellous? It was told Aristotle, that somebody had spoken ill of
him, to whom he answered, 'Let him also whippe me, so my selfe be not
by.  Our forefathers were content to revenge+ an insult with the lie,
a lie with a blowe, a blowe with bloud, and so in order.  They were
sufficiently valiant not to feare their adversary, though he lived and
were wronged: whereas we quake for feare so loug as we see him afoot.
And that it is so, doth not our moderne practise pursue to death as
well him who hath wronged us as him whom we have offended?  It is also
a kind of dastardlinesse which hath brought this fashion into our
single combates, to accompany us in the fields with seconds, thirdes,
and fourths.  They were anciently single combates, but now they are
skirmishes and battels.  To be alone, feared the first that invented
it.  Quum in se cuique minimum fiducite esset: 'When every man had
least confidence in himselfe.  For, what company soever it be, it doth
naturally bring some comfort and ease in danger.  In ancient time they
were wont to employ third persons as sticklers, to see no treachery or
disorder were used, and to beare witnes of the combates successe.  But
now this fashion is come up, let any man be engaged, whosoever is
envited cannot well containe himselfe to be a spectator, lest it be
imputed unto him it is either for want of affection or lack of
courage.  Besides the injustice of such an action and villany, for
your honours protection, to engage other valour and force than your
owne, I find it a disadvantage in an honest and worthy man, and who
wholly trusts unto himselfe, to entermingle his fortune with a second
man: every one runneth sufficient hazard for himselfe, and need not
also runne it for another: and hath enough to do to assure himselfe of
his owne vertue for the defence of his life, without committing so
precious a thing into third mens hands. yr, if the contrary hath not
expresly beene covenanted of all foure, it is a combined party.  If
your fellow chance to faile, you have two upon you, and not without
reason: and to say it is a Superchery, as it is indeed: as being wel
armed, to charge a man who hath but a piece of a sword, or being sound
and strong, to set upon a man sore hurt.  But if they be advantages
you have gotten fighting, you may use them without imputation.
Disparitie is not considered, and inequality is not balanced, but by
the state wherein the fight is begun.  As of the rest you must rely on
fortune, and if alone or single you chance to have three upon you,
your other two companions being slain, you have no more wrong done you
than I should offer in wars in striking an enemie whom at such an
advantage I should finde grappled with one of my fellow-souldiers. The
nature of societie beareth where troupe is against troupe (as where
our Duke of Orleans chalenged Henry King of England, one hundred
against another hundred; three hundred against as many, as did the
Argians against the Lacedemonians; three to three, as were the Horatij
against the Curatij), the pluralitie of either side is never respected
for more than a single man.  Wheresoever there is company, the hazard
is confused and disordered. I have a private interest in this
discourse.  For my brother, the Lord of Matecoulom, being desired in
Rome to second and accompany a gentleman with whom he had no great
acquaintance, who was defendant and challenged by another; the fight
begunne, my brother by chance found himselfe confronted with one
neerer and better known to him (I would faine be resolved of these
lawes of honour, which so often shock and trouble those of reason),
whom after he had vanquished and dispatched, seeing the two principals
of the quarrell yet standing and unhurt, he went to reskew his fellow.
What could he doe lesse? should he have stood still, and (if chance
would so have had it) see him defeated for whose defence he was entred
the quarrell? What until then he had done was nothing to the purpose,
and the quarrel was still undecided.  Al the courtesie you can, you
ought surely use to your enemy, especially when you have brought him
under, and to some great advantage; I know not how a man may use it,
when anothers interest depends on it, where you are but accessory and
where the quarrel is not yours.  Hee could never be just nor curteous
in hazard of him unto whom he had lent himselfe. So was he presently
delivered out of the Italian prisons by a speedy and solemne letter of
commendations from our King.  Oh, indiscreet nation!  We are not
contented to manifest our follies and bewray our vices to the world by
reputation; but we goe into forraigne nations, and there in person
shew them.  Place three Frenchmen in the deserts of Libya, and they
will never live one moneth together without brawling, falling out, and
scratching one another; you would say this peregrination is a party
erected to please strangers with our tragedies; and those most
commonly who rejoyce and scoffe at our evils.  We travel into Italie
to learne the art of fencing, and practise it at the cost of our
lives, before we know it; it were requisite, according to the order of
true discipline, we should preferre the theorike before the practike.
We betray our apprentisage.

  Primitiae iuvenum miserae, bellique futuri

  Dura rudimenta./1

  The miserable first essayes of youth

  And hard beginnings of warre that ensu'th.

I know it is an art profitable to her end (in the single combate
betweene the two Princes, cosin-Germans, in Spaine, the eldest of
which (saith T.  Livius) by the skil of his weapons, and by craft,
overcame easily the dismayed forces of the younger) and as by
experience I have knowen the knowledge and skil whereof hath puffed
the heart of some beyond their naturall proportion.  But it is not
properly a vertue, since she draw-eth her stay from dexteritie and
takes her foundation from other than from her selfe.  The honour of
combates consisteth in the jealousie of the heart, not of the

----- 1 STAT.  Silv. 1. v.

science.  And therefore have I seene some of my friends, renowned for
great Masters in this exercise, in their quarrels to make choice of
weapons that might well take the meane of this advantage or oddes from
them; and which wholly depend on fortune and assurance that their
victorie might not rather be imputed to their fencing then ascribed to
their valour.  And in my infancy our nobility scorned the reputation
of a fencer, though never so cunning, as injurious; and if any learnt
it they would sequester themselves from company, deeming the same as a
mystery of craft and subtility, derogating from true and perfect
vertue. {amateur+}

  Non scntivar, non parar, non ritirarsi

  Voglion costor, ne qui destrezza ha parte;

  Non danno i colpi finti hor pieni, hor scarsi;

  Togli l'ira e'l furor l'uso dell'arte,

  Odi le spade horribilmente urtarsi

  A mezzo il ferro, il pie d'orma non parte,

  Sempre e il pie fermo, e la man sempre in moto,

  Ne scende taglio in van, ne punta a voto./1

  T' avoyde, toward retiring to give ground

  They reke not, nor hath nimblenes heere part,

  Nor give false blowes, nor full, nor scarce, nor sound,

  Rage and revenge bereave all use of arte.

  Their Swordes at halfe Sword horribly resound

  You might heare mette: No foote from steppe doth parte:

  Their foote still fast, their hand still faster-mooveth:

  No stroke in vaine, no thrust in vaine, but prooveth.

Shooting at Buts, Tilting, Torneyes, Barriers, the true images of
martiall combats, were the exercises of our forefathers. This other
exercise is so much the lesse noble, by how much it respecteth but a
private end: which against the lawes of justice teacheth us to destroy
one another, and every way produceth ever mischievous effects.  It is
much more worthy and better beseeming for a man to exercise himselfe
in things that assure and offend not our Commonwealth and which
respect publike securitie and generall glory.  Publius Rutilius was
the first that ever instituted the

----- 1 TASS.  Gier. can. xii. st. 53.

Souldier to manage his armes by dexteritie and skil, and joyned art
onto vertue, not for the use of private contentions, but for the wars
and Roman peoples quarrels; a popular and civill manner of fencing;
and besides the example of Caesar, who appointed his souldier above
all things to aime and strike at the face of Pompeyes men in the
battell of Pharsalia: a thousand other Chieftaines and Generals have
devised new fashions of weapons and new kindes of striking, and
covering of themselves, according as the present affaires require.
But even as Philopoemen condemned wrestling, wherein hee excelled
others, forsomuch as the preparations appertaining to this exercise
differed from those that belong to military discipline, to which he
supposed men of honour should amuse and addict themselves, me thinkes
also that this nimblenesse or agilitie to which men fashion and enure
themselves, their Iimbes, their turnings, windings, and nimble-quicke
motions wherein youth is instructed and trained in this new schoole,
are not only unprofitable but rather contrary and damageable for the
use of militarie combat: And wee see our men do commonly employ
particular weapons in their fence schools, and peculiarly appointed
for that purpose.  And I have seene it dis-allowed that a gentleman
chalenged to fight with rapier and dagger should present himselfe in
the equipage of a man at armes; or that another should offer to come
with his cloake instead of a dagger.  It is worthy the noting that
Lachez in Plato, speaking of an apprentisage how to manage armes
conformable to ours, saith he could never see any notable warrior come
of a school of fence, and especially from among the maisters.  As for
them our owne experience confirmes as much.  And for the rest we may
at least say they are sufficiencies of no relation or correspondency.
And in the institution of the children of this Commonwealth, Plato
interdicts the artes of striking or playing with fists devised by
Amycus and Epeius, and to wrestle invented by Antoeus and Cercyo:
because they aime at another end then to adapt youth to warlike
service, and have no afflilition with it.  But I digresse much from my
theame, The Emperour Mauricius' being forwarned by dreames and sundry
prognostications that one Phocas a souldier at that time yet unknowne,
should kill him, demanded of Philip his sonne in law who that Phocas
was, his nature, his conditions and customes, and how amongst other
things Philip told him he was a faint, cowardly, and timorous fellow.
The Emperour thereby presently concluded that he was both cruel and a
murtherer.  What makes tyrants+ so bloud-thirstie? it is the care of
their securities and that their faint hart yeelds them no other meanes
to assure themselves then by rooting out those which may in any sort
offend them; yea, silly women, for feare that they should or bite or
scratch them:

  Cuncta ferit dum cuncta timet./1

  Of all things he afraide,

  At all things fiercely laide.

The first cruelties are exercised by themselves, thence proceedeth the
feare of a just revenge, which afterward produces that swarme of new
cruelties; by the one to stifle the other.  Philip, the King of
Macedon, who had so many crowes to pul with the Romanes, agitated by
the horror of so many murthers committed by his appointment, and
unable to make his partie good, or to take any safe resolution against
so many families, by him at severall times injured, resolved at last
to seize upon al their children whom he had caused to be murthered,
that so he might day by day one after another rid the world, of them,
and so establish his safety.  Matters of worth are not impertinent
wheresoever they be placed. I, who rather respect the weight and
benefite of discourses then their order and placing, need not feare to
place here at randome a notable storie. When they are so rich of their
owne beautie, and may very well uphold themselves alone, I am content
with a haires end, to fitte or joyne them to my purpose. Amongst
others who had been condemned

----- 1 CLAUD. in Eutrop. 1. i. 182.

by Philip was one Herodicus, Prince of the Thessalians: after whom he
caused his two sonnes in lawe to be put to deathe, each of them
leaving a young sonne behind.  Theoxena and Arco were the two
widdowes.  Theoxena, although she were instantly urged thereunto,
could never be induced to marry againe.  Arco tooke to husband Poris,
a chiefe man amongst the AEneans, and by him had divers children, all
which she left very young.  Theoxena, moved by a motherly cbaritie
toward her young nephews, and so to have them in her protection and
bringing up, wedded Poris.  Vpon this came out the proclamation of the
Kings edict.  This noble- minded mother, distrusting the Kings
crueltie and fearing the mercilesness of his satelities or officers
towards these noble, hopefull and tender youths, feared not to say
that shee would rather kil them with her own bands then deliver them.
Poris, amazed at her protestations, promiseth her secretly to convey
them to Athens, there by some of his faithful friends to be kept
safely.  They take occasion of a yearly feast which to the honour of
AEneas was solemnized at AEnea, and thither they goe, where having all
day long assisted at the ceremonies and publike banket, night being
come, they convay themselves into a shippe appointed for that purpose
in hope to save themselves by sea.  But the winde fell out so
contrarie that the next morning they found themselves in view of the
towne whence the night before they had hoisted sailes, where they were
pursued by the garders and souldiers of the port.  Which Poris
perceiving, laboured to hasten and encourage the mariners to shift
away: but Tbeoxena, engaged through love and revenge, remembring her
first resolution, prepared both weapons and poisons, and presenting
them to their sight, thus she bespake them: 'Oh my dear children, take
a good heart; death is now the onely meane of your defence and
libertie, and shall be a just cause unto the Gods for their holy
justice.  These bright keen blades, these full cuppes shall free you
the passage unto it.  Courage therefore, and thou my eldest childe
take this sword to die the strongest death.  Who on the one side
having so undaunted a perswader, and on the other their enemies ready
to cut their throats in furious manner, ranne all to that which came
next to his hand; and so all goared and panting were throwne into the
sea.  Theoxena, proud she had so gloriously provided for her
children's safety, lovingly embraced her husband, said thus unto him:
'Oh ny dear heart, let us follow these boyes, and together with them
enjoy one self-same grave;' and so close-claspe together they flung
themselves into the maine: so that the ship was brought to shore
againe, but emptie of her maisters.  Tyrants+, to act two things
together, that is, to kill and cause their rage to be felt, have
employed the utmost of their skill to devise lingering deaths.  They
will have their enemies die, yet not so soone but that they may, have
leisure to feele their vengeance.  Wherin they are in great
perplexity; for if the torments be over-violent, they are short; if
lingring, not grevious enough.  In this they imploy their wits and
devices, many examples whereof we see in antiquitie; and I wot not
whether we retain some spice of that barbarisme.  Whatsoever is beyond
a simple death seemeth to me meere crueltie.  Our justice cannot hope
that he whom the terror of death cannot dismay, be he to be hanged or
beheaded, can in any sort be troubled with the imagination of a
languishing fire, of a wheele, or of burning pincers.  And I wot not
whether in that meane time we bring him to despair; for what plight
can the soule of man be in that is broken up on a wheele, or, after
the old fashion, nailed to a crosse, and 24 howres together expects
his death!  Josephus reporteth that whilst the Roman warres continued
in Jewrie, passing by a place where certain Jewes had been crucified
three dayes before, he knew three of his friends amongst them, and
having gotten leave to remove them, two of them died, but the third
lived long after.  Chalcondylas, a man of credite, in the memories he
left of matters happened in his time and thereabouts, maketh report of
an extreame torment the Emperor Mechmed was often wont to put in
practice, which was by one onely blow of a cimitary, or broad Persian
sword, to have men cut in two parts, by the waste of the body, about
the diapbragma, which is a membrane lying overthwart the lower part of
the breast, separating the heart and lights from the stomacke, which
caused them to die two deaths at once: and affirmeth that both parts
were seen full of life, to move and stirre long time after, as if they
had been in lingering torment.  I do not thinke they felt any great
torture in that moving.  The gastliest torments to looke upon are not
alwaies the greatest to be endured: and I finde that much more
fiercely-horrible, which other historians write, and which he used
against certain Lords of Epirus, whom faire and leasurely he caused to
be flead all over, disposed by so malicious a dispensation that their
lives continued fifteene daies in that languor and anguish. And these
two others: Croesus having caused a gentleman to be apprehended,
greatly favoured by Pantaleon his brother, led him in a fullers or
clothworkers shoppe, where with cardes and teazles belonging to that
trade, he made him to be carded, scraped, and teazled so long until he
died of it.  George Sechel, ring-leader of the countrymen of Polina,
who under the title of a croysada, wrought so many mischiefs, having
beene defeated in a battell by the Vayvoda of Transilvania and taken
prisoner, was for three dayes together tyed naked to a wooden horse,
exposed to all manner of tortures any man might devise against him;
during which time divers other prisoners were kept fasting.  At last,
he yet living, saw Lucat his deare brother, and for whose safety he
sued and entreated, forced to drinke his blood, drawing all the envie
and hatred of his misdeeds upon himselfe.  And twenty of his most
favoured captaines were compelled to feed upon his flesh, which with
their teeth they must teare off and swallow their morsels.  The rest
of his body and entrailes, he being dead, were boiled in a pan, and
given for food to other of his followers.

CHAPTER 2.XXVIII+ ALL THINGS HAVE THEIR SEASON



THOSE who compare Cato the Censor to Cato+ the Younger that killed
himselfe, compare two notable natures, and in forme neare one unto
another.  The first exploited his sundrie waies and excelleth in
military exploits and utilitie of his publike vacations.  But the
youngers vertue (besides that it were blasphemy in vigor to compare
any unto him) was much more sincere and unspotted. For who will
discharge the Censors of envie and ambition that durst counterchecke
the honour of Scipio+ in goodnes and all other parts of excellencie,
farre greater and better than him or any other man living in his age?
Amongst other things reported of him, this is one, that in his eldest
a he gave himselfe with so earnest a longing to the Greek tong, as if
it had been to quench a long burning thirst, a thing in mine opinion
not very honourable in him.  It is properly that which we call doting,
or to become a childe againe.  All things have their season yea the
good and all.  And I may say my Paternoster out of season.  As T.
Quintius Flaminius was accused, forasmuch as being generall of an
army, even in the houre of the conflict he was seene to withdraw
himselfe apart, amusing, himselfe to pray God although he gained the
battell.

  Imponit finem sapiens et rebus honestis./1

  A wise-man will use moderation,

  Even in things of commendation.


  Eudemonidas seeing Xenocrates very old laboriously


----- 1 JUVEN.  Sat. vi. 344.

apply himselfe in his schoole-lectures, said, When will this man know
something, since he is yet learning?  And Philopoemen, to those who
highly extolled King Ptolomey because he daily hardened his body to
the exercise of armes: It is not (said he) a matter commendable in a
King of his age in them to exercise himselfe, he should now really and
substantially imploy them.  Wise men say that young men should make
their preparations and old men enjoy them.  And the greatest vice they
note in us is, that our desires do uncessantly grow yonger and yonger.
We are ever beginning anew to live. Our studies and our desires should
sometimes have a feeling of age.  We have a foote in the grave, and
our appetites and pursuits are but new-borne.

  Tu secanda marmora

  Locas sub ipsum funus, et sepulcri

  Immemor, struis domos./1

  You, when you should be going to your grave,

  Put marble out to worke, in houses brave,

  Unmindfull of the buriall you must have.

The longest of my desseignes doth not extend to a whole yeare: now I
only apply my selfe to make an end: I shake off all my new hopes and
enterprises: I bid my last farewell to all the places I leave, and
daily dispossess my selfe of what I have.  Olim iam nec perit quicquam
mihi, nec acquiritur.  Plus superest viatici quam viae:/2 'It is a
good while since I neither loose nor get any thing: I have more to
beare my charges then way to goe.'

  Vixi, et quem dederat cursum fortuna peregi./3

  I have liv'd, and the race have past

  Wherein my fortune had me plac't.

To conclude, it is all the case I finde in my age, and that it
suppresseth many cares and desires in me wherewith life is much
disquieted.  The care of

----- 1 HOR.  Car. 1. ii. ed. xviii. 17. 2 SEN.  Epist. lxxvii. 3
VIRG.  AEn. 1. iv. 653.

the worlds course, the care of riches, of greatnesse, of knowledge, of
health, and of my selfe.  This man learneth to speake when he should
rather learne to hold his peace for ever.  A man may alwaies continue
his study, but not schooling.  O fond-foolish for an old man to be
ever an Abecedarian.

  Diversos diversa iuvant, non omnibus annis

  Omnia conveniunt./1

  Diverse delights to diverse nor to all

  Do all things at all yeares convenient fall.

If we must needs study, let us study something sorteable to our
condition, that we may answer as he did, who being demanded what his
studies would stead him in his decrepity, answered that he might the
better and with more ease leave this world.  Such a study was yong
Catoes+ in forefeeling his approaching end, who lighted upon Platoes
discourse on the soules immortality. Not as it may be supposed that
long before he had not stored himselfe with all sorts of munition for
such a dislodging.  Of assurance, of constancy+ and instruction, he
had more than Plato hath in all his writings.  His science and his
courage were in this respect above all Philosophy.  Hee undertook this
occupation, not for the service of his death, but as one who did not
so much as interrupt his sleep in a deliberation of such consequence,
who ever without choice or change continued his wonted studies, and
all other accustomed actions of his life.  The same night wherein the
Pretorship was refused him he passed over in play.  That wherein he
must die, he spent in reading.  The losse of life or office was all
one to him.

----- 1 CATUL.  Eleg. i. 103.

CHAPTER 2.XXIX+ OF VERTUE

I FINDE by experience that there is great difference betweene the
sodaine fits and fantasies of the soule, and a resolute disposition
and constant habitude: and I see there is nothing but we may attaine
unto, yea, as some say, to exceede Divinitie it selfe; forsomuch as it
is more to become impassible of himselfe, then to be so by his
originall condition: and that one may joyne a resolution and assurance
of God to mens imbecillitie.  But it is by fits.  And in the lives of
those heroes or noble worthies of former ages, are often found
wonderfull parts, and which seems greatly to exceed our naturall
forces: but they are prankes or parts consonant to truth: and it may
hardly be believed mans soule may so be tainted and fed with those so
high-raised conditions, that onto it they may become as ordinary and
naturall.  It hapneth unto our selves, who are but abortive broods of
men, sometimes to rowse our soule farre beyond her ordinary pitch, as
stirred up by the discourses or provoked by the examples of others.
But it is a kinde of passion which urgeth, mooveth, agitateth, and in
some sort ravisheth her from out her selfe: for, that gust overblowne
and storme past, wee see it wil unawares unbend and lose it selfe, if
not to the lowest pitch, at least to be no more the same she was, so
that upon every slight occasion, for a bird lost or for a glasse
broken, we suffer our selves to be mooved and distempered very neere
as one of the vulgar sort.  Except order, moderation+, and
constancie+, I imagine all things may bee done by an indifferent and
defective man.  Therefore say wise men, that directly to judge of a
man, his common actions must specially be controuled, and he must
every day be surprised in his work-day clothes. Pyrrho, who framed so
pleasant a science of ignorance, assaied (as all other true
philosophers) to fashion his life answerable to his doctrine. And
forasmuch as he maintained the weaknesse of mans judgement to be so
extreame as it could take nor resolution nor inclination: and would
perpetually suspend it, ballancing, bebolding and receiving all things
as indifferent: it is reported of him that he ever kept himselfe after
one fashion, looke and countenance.  If he had begunne a discourse, he
would end it, though the party to whom he spake were gone: and if he
went any where, he would not goe an inche out of his path what let or
obstacle soever came in his way; being kept from falls, from cartes,
or other accidents by his friends. For, to feare or shunne any thing
had beene to shocke his propositions, which remooved all election and
certainty from his very senses.  He sometimes suffered himselfe to be
cut and cautherized with such constancy as he was never seen so much
as to shrug, twitch, move, or winke with his eyes.  It is something to
bring the minde to these imagination, but more to joine the effects
unto it, yet is it not impossible.  But to joine them with such
perseverance and constancy as to establish it for an ordinary course;
verily in these enterprises so farre from common use, it is almost
incredible to be done.  The reason is this, that he was sometimes
found in his house bitterly scolding with his sister for which being
reproved as he that wronged his indifferencie; 'What!' said he, 'must
this seely woman also serve as a witnesse to my rules?  Another time,
being found to defend himselfe from a dog: 'It is,' replied be, 'very
hard altogether to dispoile and shake off man;' and man must endevour
and enforce himselfe to resist and confront all things, first by
effects, but if the worst befall, by reason and by discourse.  It is
now about seven or eight yeares since, that a country man yet living
not above two leagues from this place, having long before beene much
vexed and troubled in minde for his wives jealousies one day comming
home from his worke, and she after her accustomed manner welcomming
and entertaining him with brawling and scowlding, as, one unable to
endure her any longer, fell into such a moodie rage that sodainely
with a sickle which he held in his hand he clean cut off those parts
tnat were the cause of her jealousies and flung them in her face.  And
it is reported that a yong gentleman of France, amorous and lustie,
having by his perseverance at last mollified the heart of his faire
mistresse, desperate, because comming to the point of his so long
sued-for businesses he found himselfe unable and unprepared, and that

  -----non viriliter

  Iners senile penis extulerat caput./1


As soone as he came home he deprived himselfe of it, and sent it as a
cruel and blou4y sacrifice for the expiation of his offence.  Had he
done it by discourse or for religions sake, as the priestes of Cybele
were wont to do, what might we not say of so haughty an enterprise?
Not long since at Bragerac, five leagues distance from my house, up
the river of Dordaigne, a woman, having the evening before beene
grievously tormented and sore beaten by hir husband, froward and
skittish by complexion, determined, though it should cost hir the
price of hir life, by one meane or other to escape his rudeness, and
rising the next morning, went as she was accustomed to visite her
neigbbours, to whom in some sort she recommended the state of hir
affaires, then taking a sister of hirs by the hand, ledde hir along
untill she came upon the bridge that crosseth the river, and having
bid her hartily farewell, as in the way of sport, without shewing any
maner of change or alteration, headlong threw hirselfe down into the
river, where she perished.  And which is more to be noted in hir is,
that this hir determination ripened a whole night in hir head.  But
the Indian wives may not here be forgotten as worthy the noting: whose
custome is, that

----- 1 TIB. 1.  Ad Priap. v. 4.

husbands have many wives, and for hir that is dearest unto hir husband
to kill herselfe after him: every one in the whole course of hir life
endevoreth to obtaine this priviledge and advantage over all her
fellow wives: and in the good offices and duties they shew their
husbands, respect no other recompence than to be preferred to
accompany them in death.

  Ubi mortifero jacta est fax ultima lecto,

  Uxorem fusis, stat pia turba comis:

  Et certamen habent Lethi, quae viva sequator

  Coniugium, pudor est non licuisse mori:

  Ardent victrices, et flammae pectora praebent,

  Imponuntque suis ora perusta viris./1

  When for his death-bed last flame is appli'd

  With loose haires many kind wives stand beside,

  And strive for death, which alive may be next

  Hir wedlocke, who may not, is sham'd and vex't:

  They that orecome, are burn'd, to flames give way,

  Their bodies burnt on their burnt husbands lay.

A late writer affirrneth that himselfe hath seene this custome highly
reputed in the new discovered East Indies, where not only the wives
are buried with their husbands, but also such slaves as he hath
enjoyed which is done after this manner.  The husband being deceased,
the widdow may, if she will (but few do it, request two or three
monthes space to dispose of hir busines.  The day come, adorned as a
sumptuous bride, she mounteth on horsebacke, and with a cheereful
countenance telleth everybody she is going to lie with her
bridegroome, holding in her left hand a looking-glasse, and an arrow
in the right.  Thus having a while rid up and downe in great pomp and
magnificence, accompanied with her friends and kinsmen, and much
concourse of people, in feast and jollitie, she is brought into a
publike pace, purposely appointed for such spectacles; which is a
large open place, in the middest whereof is a pit or grave full of
wood, and neere unto it an upraised scaffold, with foure or five
steppes to ascend, upon which she is brought, and served with a
stately

----- 1 PROPERT. 1. iii.  Eleg. xii. 17.

and sumptuous banket, which ended, she beginneth to dance and sing,
and when she thinks good, commandeth the fire to be kindled.  That
done, she commeth down a againe, and taking the nearest of hir
husbands kindred by the hand, they goe together to the next river,
where she strippes hir selfe all naked and distributeth hir jewels and
cloathes among hir friends, then plungeth herselfe in the water, as if
she meant to wash away hir sins; then comming out she enwrappeth her
selfe in a yellow piece of linnen cloth, about the length of fourteene
yards; and giving her band againe unto hir husbands kinsmen, they
returne unto the mount, where she speakes unto the people, to whom (if
she have any) she recommendeth hir children.  Betweene the pitte and
mount there is commonly a curtaine drawne, lest the sight of that
burning furnace might dismay them: which many, to shew the greater
courage, wil not have it drawne.  Her speech ended, a woman presenteth
her with a vessell ful of oyl, therewith to annoint her head and body,
which done, she casteth the rest into the fire, and therewithall
sodainly flings herselfe-into it: which is no sooner done but the
people cast great stors of faggots and billets upon hir, lest she
should languish over- long: and all their joy is converted into griefe
and sorrow.  If they be persons of meane quality, the dead mans body
is carried to the place where they intend to bury him, and there be is
placed sitting; his widdow kneeling before him with her armes close
about his middle, and so keepeth hirself whilst a wall is erected up
about them both, which raised to the height of her shoulders, some of
her kindred taking her by the head behind, wrings hir neck about, and
having given the last gaspe, the wall is immediately made up close
over their heads, wherein they remain buried.  In the same country
there was something like to this in their Gymnosophists, or wise men,
who not by menaces or compulsions of others, nor by the violence of a
sodaine humour, but by the expresse and voluntary profession of their
rule, their maner was according as they attained unto a certaine age,
or saw themselves threatned by some sicknesse, to cause a pile of wood
to be erected and upon it a rich bedde; and having cheerefully feasted
their friends and acquaintance, with such a resolution laid themselves
downe in that bed, that fire set unto it, they were never seene to
stirre nor hand nor foot; and thus died one of them named Calanus in
the presence of all the army of Alexander the Great.  And who had not
so made himselfe away was neither esteemed holy nor absolutely happy
among them; sending his soul purged and purified by fire after it had
consumed whatsoever was mortal and terrestrial in it.  This constant
premeditation of al the life is that which makes the wonder.  Amongst
our other disputation, that of Fatum hath much entermedled it selfe:
and to joyne future things and our wil itselfe unto a certaine
unavoydable necessitie, we yet stand upon that argument of former
times: since God forseeth al things must thus happen, as undoubtedly
he doeth: they must then necessarily happen so.  To which our clarks
and maisters answere, that to see any thing come to passe as wee doe,
and likewise God (for he being present in ful essence rather seeth
than foreseeth), is not to force the same to happen: yea we see
because things come to passe, but things happen not because we
see. {Milton+} The hapning makes the science or knowledge, and not
knowledge the happening.  What we see come to passe, happeneth; but it
might come to passe otherwise.  And God in the eternall register of
the causes of happenings, which he hath in his prescience, hath also
those which are called casual; and the voluntary, which depend of the
liberty he hath given unto our free will, and knoweth we shall faile,
because our will shall have beene to faile.  I have seene divers
encourage their troupes with this fatall necessitie; for, if our hour
be tied unto a certaine point neither the musket- shottes of our
enemie, nor our courage, nor our flight and cowardice can either
advance or recoyle the same.  This may well be said, but seeke you who
shall effect it: and if it be so that a strong and lively faith doth
likewise draw action after it: truely this faith (wherewith we so much
fil our mouthes) is marvelous light in our times, except the contempt
it hath of works, make her disdaine their company.  So it is that to
the same purpose the Lord of Joinville, as credible a witnesse as any
other, tells us of the Bedoins, a nation intermingled with the
Saracine, with whom our King Saint Lewis had to deale in the holy land
who so confidently believed in their religion the dayes of every one
to be prefixed and numbred from all eternity by an inevitable
preordinance, that they went al bare and naked to the warres except a
Turkish glaive in their hand, and their body covered but with a white
linnen cloth: and for the bitterest curse, if they chanced to fall out
one with another, they had ever in their mouth: 'Cursed be then as he
that armeth himselfe for feare of death.  Here is another maner of
triall or a belief or faith then ours.  In this rank may likewise be
placed that which those two religious men'of Florence not long since
gave unto their countrymen.  Being in some controversie betweene
themselves about certaine points of learning, they accorded to go both
into the fire in the presence of al the people and in the open market
place, each one for the verifying of his opinion; and all preparations
were ready made and execution to be performed, but that by an
unexpected accident it was interrupted.  A yong Turkish Lord, having
achieved a notable piece of service in armes and with his own person
in ful view of the two battels between Ammurath and Huniades ready to
be joyned together, being demanded by Ammurath his prince, who being
so yong and inexperienced (for it was the first warre or service he
had seen before) had replenished him with so generous and undanted
vigor of courage, answered that a hare had beene his soveraigue
maister and onely teacher of valour; and thus began his speech: Being
one day a hunting, I found a hare sitting in her forme, and although I
had a brace of excellent good greyhounds with me in a slip or leash, I
thought it good, because I would be sure of my same to use my bow; for
she was a very fair narke.  I begaune to shoot my arrowes at her,
which I did to the number of fortie (for in my quiver were just so
many), yet could I never hurt her, no not so much as start her.  After
all this I let slip my grayhounds, who could do no more than I had
done: by which I learnt that she had been sheltred and defended by her
destinie; and that no glaives nor arrowes never hit but by the
permission of our fatalitie, which it lieth not in us to =or advance.
This storie may serve to make us perceive by the way how flexible our
reason is to all sorts of objects.  A notable man, great in yeares, in
name, in dignity, and in learning, vaunted himselfe unto me, that he
was induced to a certaine most important change of his religion by a
strange and fantasiical incitation: and in al things so il concluding
that I deemed the same stronger and more forcible being taken
contrary.  He termed it a miracle, and so did I, but in a different
sense.  Their historians say that perswasion having popularly beene
scattered amongst the Turkes of the fatal and inflexible prescription
of their dayes, doth apparently aide to warrant and embolden them in
dangers. And I know a great Prince who happily thrives by it, be it he
believe it or take it for an excuse to hazard himselfe
extraordinarily; provided fortune be not soone wearie to favour and
backe him.  There hath not happened in our memorie a more admirable
effect of resolution than of those two villaines that conspired the
death of the Prince of Orange: it is strange how the last who
performed the same could be induced or encouraged to undergo such an
enterprize, wherein his fellow (though he had resolutely attempted it
and had all might be required for such an action) had so ill success
and miscarried.  And in those steps and with the same weapons to go
and undertake a Lord, armed with so late an instruction of distrust;
mighty in friends and followers, puissant of bodily strength, in his
owne hall, amiddest his servants and guarde, and in a city wholly at
his devotion.  It must of force be said that in performing it he
employed a well- directed and resolute band and a dreadlesse courage,
mooved by a vigorous passion.  A poynard is more sure to wound a man,
which forsomuch as it requireth more motion and vigour of the arme
than a pistol, its stroke is more subject to be hindred or avoyded.
That the first ranne not to an assured death I make no great doubt,
for the hopes wherewith he might be entertained could not harbour in a
well-setled and resolute midde, and the conduct of his exploit sheweth
he wanted no more that then courage.  The motions of so forcible a
perswasion may be diverse, for our fantasia disposeth of her self and
of us as she pleaseth.  The execution committed neere Orleans had no
coherence with this wherein was more hazard than vigor; the blow was
not mortall had not fortune made it so, and the enterprise to shoote
on horsebacke and far-off, and to one who mooved still according to
the motion of his horse, was the attempt of a man that rather loved to
misse of his effect then faile to save himselfe.  What followed did
manifestly shew it; for he was so amazed and drunken with the thought
of so haughty an execution, as he lost all his senses, both to worke
his escape and direct his tongue in his answers.  What needed he have
done more then recover his friends by crossing of a river?  It is a
meane wherein I have cast my selfe in farre lesse dangers; and which I
thinke of small hazard, how broad soever, alwayes provided your horse
find an easie entrance, and on the further side you forsee an easie
and shallow landing, according to the course of the streame of the
water.  The second, when the horrible sentence was pronounced against
him, answered stoutly: 'I was prepared for it, and I shall amaze you
with my patience.  The Assassines, a nation depending of Phoenicia,
are esteemed among the Mahometists of a soveraigne devotion and
puritie of maners: they hold that the readiest and shortest way to
gaine Paradise is to kill some one of a contrary religion; therefore
hath it often beene seene that one or two in their bare doublets have
undertaken to assault mighty enemies with the price of an assured
death and without any care of their own danger.  And thus was our
Earle Raymond of Tripoli murthered or assassinated (this word is
borrowed from their name) in the middest of his citie, daring the time
of our warres in the holy land; and likewise Conrade Marquis of
Montferrat his murtherers being brought to their torture, were seene
to swell with pride that they had performed so worthy an exploit.

CHAPTER 2.XXX+ OF A MONSTROUS CHILD


THIS discourse shall passe single, for I leave it to Physitians to
treat of.  I saw two dayes since a child whom two men and a nurse
(which named themselves to be his father, his uncle, and his aunt)
carried about with intent to get some money with the sight of him, by
reason of his strangenesse. In all the rest he was as other children
are: he stood upon his feete, went and prattled in a manner as all
others of his age.  He would never take nourishment but by his nurses
breast; and what in my presence was offred to be put in his mouth he
chewed a little and put it all out againe. His puling differed
somewhat from others: he was just fourteene monthes olde.  Under his
paps he was fastned and joyned to another childe, but had no head, and
who had the conduite of his backe stopped; the rest whole. One of his
armes was shorter than the other, and was by accident broken at their
birth.  They were joyned face to face, and as if a little child would
embrace another somewhat bigger.  The joyning and space whereat they
were closed together was but foure inches broad, or thereabouts; in
such sort that if you thrust up the imperfect childe you might see
under the others navill; and the seame was betweene the paps and his
navill.  The navill of the imperfect one could not be seene, but all
the rest of his belly might.  Thus, what of the imperfect one was not
joyned, as armes, buttocks, thighes, and legges, did hang and shake
upon the other, whose length reached to the middle-leg of the other
perfect.  His nurse told me he made water by both privities.  The
members of the little one were nourished, living, and in the same
state as the others, except only they were lesse and thinner.  This
double body nd these different members, having reference to one onely
bead, might serve for a favorable prognostication to our King to
maintaine the factions and different parties of this our kingdome
under a unitie of the lawes.  But least the successe should prove it
contrary, it is not amisse to let him runne his course; for in Things
already past there need no divination.  Vt quum facta sunt, tum ad
conjecturam aliquid interpretatione revocantur:/1 'So as when they are
done they then by some construction should be revoked to conjecture.
As it is reported of Epimenides, who ever devined backward.' I come
now from seeing of a shepherd at Medoc, of thirtie yeares of age or
thereabouts, who bad no signe at all of genitorie parts, but where
they should be are three little holes by which his water doth
continually tril from him.  This poore man hath a beard, and desireth
still to be fumbling of women.  Those which we call monsters are not
so with God, who in the immensitie of his work seeth the infinite of
formes therein contained.  And it may be thought that any figure doth
amaze us, hath relation unto some other figure of the same kinde,
although unknown unto man.  From out his all-seeing wisdome proceedeth
nothing but good, common, regular, and orderly; but we neither see the
sorting, nor conceive the relation.  Quod crebro videt, non miratur,
etiam si, cur fiat, nescit.  Quod ante non vidit, id, si evenerit,
ostentum esse censet:/2 'That which he often seeth he doth not wonder
at, though he know not why it is done; but if that happen which he
never saw before, he thinkes it some portentous wonder.  We call that
against nature which commeth against custome.  There is nothing,
whatsoever it be, that is not according to hir. Let therefore this
universall'and naturall reason chase from us the error, and expel] the
astonishment which noveltie breedeth and strangenes causeth in us,
----- 1 CIC.  Div. 1. ii. 2 CIC.  Div. 1.  II.

CHAPTER 2.XXXI+ OF ANGER+ AND CHOLER

PLUTARKE+ is everywhere admirable, but especially where he judgeth of
humane actions.  The notable things he reporteth may be perceived in
the comparison of Lycurgus and Numa, speaking of the great simplicity
we commit in leaving long children under the government and charge of
their fathers and parents.  Most of our policies or commonwealths,
saith Aristotle (as the Cyclopes were wont) commit the conduct of
their wives and charge of their children to all men, according to
their foolish humour or indiscreete fantasies.  And well-nigh none but
the Lacedemonian and Cretensian have resigned the discipline of
children to the lawes.  Who seeth not that in an estate all things
depend of nurture and education?  And all the while, without
discretion, it is wholly left to the parents mercy how foolish and
wicked soever they be.  Amongst other things, how often (walking
through our streets) have I desired to have a play or comedie made in
revenge of young boyes, which I saw thumpt, misused, and well-nigh
murthered by some harebrained, moodie, and through choler-raging
fathers and mothers, from out whose eyes a man might see sparkles of
rage to startle.


  ----- rabie jecur incendente feruntur

  Praecipites, ut saxa jugis abrupta, quibus mons


  Subtrahitur, clivoque latus pendente recedit:/1

  They headlong runne with rage, which doth enflame their livers

  Like stones that broken fall from mountaine tops in shivers,

  The hill withdrawes, and they are rould

  From hanging cliffe which leaves their hold


----- 1 JUV.  Sat. vi. 548.

(And according to Hypocrates, the most dangerous infirmities are those
which disfigure the face), and with a loud thundring voice often to
follow children that came but lately from nurse, which after prove
lame, maimed, blockish and dul- pated with blowes; and yet our lawes
makes no accompt of it, as if these spraines and unjoyntings of
limbes, or these maimes were no members of our commonwealth.

  Gratum est quod patrim civem populoque dedisti,

  Si facis ut patriae sit idoneus, utilis aqris,

  Vtilis et bellorum et pacis rebus agendis./1

  That you to th'countrie give a man, 'tis acceptable,

  If for the countrie fit you make him, for fields able,

  Of peace and warre for all achievements profitable.

There is no passion so much transports the sinceritie of judgement as
doth anger.  No man would make conscience to punish that judge by
death who in rage or choler had condemned an offender.  And why should
fathers be allowed to beate or schoolmasters be suffered to whip
children, or to punish them, being angry?  It is no longer correction,
butrevenge+. Punishment is unto children as physicke, and would any
man endure a physician that were angrie and wroth against his patient?
Our selves (did we well), during the time of our anger, should never
lay hands on our servants.  So long as our pulse panted, and we feele
any concitation, so long remit we the partic: and things will seeme
far otherwise unto us if we once come to our senses again, and shall
better bethinke us.  Then is it passion+ that commandes.  It is
passion that speaketh, and not we. Athwart it, faults seeme much
greater unto us, as bodies doe athwart a foggy mist.  Whoso is hungry
useth meat, but whoso will use chastisement should never hunger nor
thirst after it.  Moreover, corrections given with discretion and
moderation are more gently received, and with more good to him that
receiveth them.  Otherwise hee shall never thinke to have beene justly
condemned by a

----- 1 Juv.  Sat. xiv. 70.

man who is transported by rage and choler, and for his justification
alleadgeth the extraordinary motions of his maister, the inflammation
of his face, his unwonted oaths, his chafing, his unquietnesse, and
his rash precipitation.

  Ora tument ira, nigrescunt sanguine venae:

  Lumina Gorgoneo saevius igne micant./1

  The face with anger swelles, the veines grow blacke with blood,

  The eyes more fiercely shine than Gorgons fierie moode,

Suetonius writeth that Caius Rabirius, having by Caesar been
condemned, nothing did him so much good towards the people (to whom he
appealed) to make him obtain his suit, as the sharpnes and
over-boldnes which Caesar had declared in that judgement.  Saying is
one thing, and doing another. A man must consider the sermon apart and
the preacher severall.  Those have made themselves good sport who in
our dayes have gone about to checke the veritie of our Church by the
ministers vice: she fetcheth her testimony from elsewhere.  It is a
foolish manner of arguing, and which would soone reduce all things to
a confusion.  An honest man may sometimes have false opinions, and a
wicked man may preach truth: yea such a one as beleeves it not.
Verily it is a pleasing harmonie when doing and saying goe
together. And I will not deny but saying when deeds+ follow is of more
efficacie and authority: as said Eudamidas when he heard a philosopher
discourse of warre: these speeches are good, but he that speakes them
is not to be beleeved, for his eares were never accustomed to heare
the clang of trumpets nor rattling of drums.  And Cleomenes, hearing a
rhetoritian speake of valour, burst out into an extreame laughter;
whereat the other being offended, he said unto him: 'I would doe as
much if it were a swallow should speake of it, but were be an eagle I
should gladly heare him.  Me seemeth I perceive in ancient mens
writings that he who speaks what he thinketh toucheth nearer the

-----1 OVID.  Art.  Am. 1. iii. 53.

quick than he who counterfeits.  Heare Cicero+ speak of the love of
libertie, then listen to Brutus+: their wordes will tell you and sound
in your eare, the latter was a man readie to purchase it with the
price of his life. Let Cicero, that father of eloquence, treate of the
contempt of death, and let Seneca+ discourse of the same; the first
drawes it on languishing, and would faine resolve you of a thing
whereof he has not yet resolved himselfe.  He giveth you no heart, for
himselfe hath none: whereas the other doth rowze, animate, and inflame
you.  I never looke upon an author, be they such as write of vertue
and of actions, but I curiously endevour to finde out what he was
himselfe.  For the Ephon of Sparta, hearing a dissolute liver propose
a very beneficial advise unto the people, commanded him to hold his
peace, and desired an honest man to assume the invention of it unto
himselfe, and to propound it.  Plutarkes compositions, if they be well
savored, doe plainely manifest the same unto us: and I am perswaded I
know him inwardly: yet would I be glad we had some memories of his
owne life: and by the way I am falne into this discourse, by reason of
the thanks I owe unto Aulus Gellius, in that he hath left us written
this story of his manners, which fitteth my story of anger.  A slave
of his, who was a lewd and vicious man, but yet whose eares were
somewhat fedde with philosophicall documents, having for some faults
by him committed, by the commandement of Plutarke his master been
stripped naked, whilst another servant of his whipped him, grumbled in
the beginning that he was whipped without reason and had done nothing:
but in the end mainly crying out, he fell to railing and wronging his
master, upbraiding him that he was not a true Philosopher, as he
vanted himself to be, and how he had often heard him say that it was
an unseemely thing in a man to be angry.  And that he had made a booke
of it: and now, all plunged in rage and engulf'ed in choler, to cause
him so cruelly to be beaten was cleane contrarie to his owne writing.
To whom Plutarke, with an unaltered and milde-setled countenance, said
thus unto him: 'What, thou raskall, whereby doest thou judge I am now
angrie? Doth my countenance, doth my voice, doth my colour, or doth my
speech give thee any testimony that I am either moved or cholericke?
Mee seemeth mine eyes are not staringly wilde, nor my face troubled,
nor voice frightful or distempered.  Doe I waxe red?  Do I foame at
the mouth?  Doth any word escape me I may repent hereafter?  Doe I
startle and quake?  Doe I rage and ruffle with anger?  For to tell
thee true, these are the right signes of choler and tokens of anger.
Then turning to the party that whipped him: 'Continue still thy work,'
quoth he, whilst this fellow and I dispute of the matter.  This is the
report of Gellius.  Architas Tarentinus returning from a warre where
he had beene captaine generall, found his house all out of order,
husbandrie all spoiled, and by the ill government of his bailiffe, his
ground all waste and unmanured; and having called for him, said thus:
'Away, bad man, for if I were not angrie I would have thee whipt for
this.  Plato likewise being vexed and angrie with one of his slaves,
commanded Speusippus to punish him, excusing himselfe that now being
angrie he would not lay hands upon him.  Charilus the Lacedemonian, to
an Helot who behaved himselfe over insolently and audaciously towards
him, by the Gods (saith he) if I were not now angrie I would presently
make thee die. It is a passion which pleaseth and flattereth it selfe.
How many times being moved by any false suggestion, if at that instant
we be presented with any lawfull defence or true excuse, doe we fall
into rage against truth and innocencie it selfe?  Touching this
purpose, I have retained a wonderfull example of antiquitie.  Piso, in
divers other respects a man of notable vertue, being angrie, and
chafing with one of his souldiers, who returning from forage or
boothbaling, could not give him an accompt where he had left a
fellow-souldier of his, and thereupon concluding he had killed or made
him away, forthwith condemned him to be hanged.  And being upon the
gallowes and ready to dye behold his companion who had stragled
abroade, comming home, whereat all the army rejoyced very much, and
after many embracings and signes of joy between the two souldiers, the
hangman brought both unto Piso, all the company hoping it would be a
great pleasure unto him; but it fell out cleane contrary, for through
shame and spite, his wrath, still burning, was redoubled, and with a
slie devise his passion instantly presented to his minde, he made
three guiltie, forsomuch as one of them was found innocent, and caused
them all three to bee dispatched: the first souldier because he was
alreadie condemned; the second, which had stragled abroade, by reason
he was the cause of his fellowes death; and the hangman for that he
had not fulfilled his generalls commandement.  Those who have to deale
with froward and skittish women have no doubt seene what rage they
will fall into, if when they are most angrie and chafing a man be
silent and patient, and disdains to foster their anger and wrath.
Celius the orator was by nature exceedingly fretfull and cholerike.
To one who was with him at supper, a man of a milde and gentle
conversation, and who because he would not move him, seemed to approve
whatever he said, and yeeld to him in every thing, as unable to endure
his peevishness should so passe without some nourishment, burst out
into a rage and said unto him: 'For the love of God, deny me
something, that we may be two.  So women are never angrie but to the
end a man should againe be angrie with them, therein imitating the
lawes of love.  Phocion to a man who troubled his discourse with
brawling and scolding at him in most injurious manner, did nothing
else but hold his peace, and give him what leisure he would to vent
his choler, which done, without taking any notice of it, began his
discourse againe where he had left it off.  There is no reply so
sharpe as such silent contempt. Of the most cholerlike and testie man
of France (which is ever an imperfection, but more excusable in a
military man, for it must needes be granted there are in that
profession some men who cannot well avoyde it) I ever say he is the
patientest man I knowe to bridle his choler; it mooveth and
transporteth him with such furie and violence --

  ----- magno veluti cum flamma sonore

  Vigea suggeritur costis undantis aheni,


  Exultantque aestu latices, furit intus aquai

  Fumidus atque alte spumis exuberat amnis,

  Nec jam se capit unda, volat vapor ater ad auras --/1

  As when a fagot flame with hurring sounds

  Under the ribbes of boyling cauldron lies,

  The water swelles with heat beyond the bounds,

  Whence streaming streames raging and foaming rise,

  Water out-runs it selfe, blacke vapours flye to skies.

-- that he must cruelly enforce himselfe to moderate the same.  And
   for my part I know noe passion I were able to smother with such
   temper and abide with such resolution.  I would not set wisdome at
   so high a rate. I respect not so much what he doth as how much it
   cost him not to doe worse. Another boasted in my presence of his
   behaviours order and mildnesse, which in truth is singular.  I
   tolde him that indeed it was much, namely, in men of so eminent a
   quality as himselfe was, on whom all eyes are fixed, alwaies to
   shew himselfe in a good temper; but that the chiefest point
   consisted in providing inwardly and for himselfe; and that in mine
   opinion it was no discreet part inwardly to fret: which, to
   maintaine that marke and formall outward appearance, I feared hee
   did.  Choler is incorporated by concealing and smothering the same,
   as Diogenes said to Demosthenes, who fearing to be seene in a
   taverne withdrew himselfe into the ame.  The more thou recoylest
   backe, the further thou goest into it.  I would rather perswade a
   man, though somewhat out of season, to give his boy a wherrat on
   the eare, then to dissemble this wise, sterile or severe
   countenance, to vex and fret his minde.  And I would rather make
   shew of my passions then smother them to my

----- 1 VIRG.  AEn. 1. vii. 462.

cost, which being vented and exprest, become more languishing and
weake: better it is to let its pointe worke outwardly, then bend it
against our selves. Omnia vitia in aperto leviora aunt: et tunc
perniciosissima, quum simulata nitatesubsidunt;/1 'All vices are then
lesse perilous when they lie open to bee seene, but then most
pernitious when they lurke under counterfeited soundenesse.' I ever
warne those of my household who by their offices-authoritie may
sometimes have occasion to be angry, first to husband their anger,
then not employ it upon every slight cause; for that impeacheth the
effect and worth of it.  Rash and ordinary brawling is converted to a
custome, and thats the reason each man contemnes it.  That which you
employ against a servant for any theeving is not perceived, because it
is the same he hath sundry times seene you use against him if he have
not washt a glasse well or misplaced a stoole.  Secondly, that they be
not angry in vaine, but ever have regard their chiding come to his
eares with whom they are offended; for commonly some will brawle
before he come in their presence, and chide a good while after he is
gone --

  Et secure petulans amentia certat,/2

  Madnesse makes with it selfe a fray,

  Which fondly doth the wanton play --

and wreake their anger against his shadow, and make the storme fall
where no man is either chastised or interested, but with the rumour of
their voice, and sometimes with such as cannot doe withall.  I
likewise blame those who being angry will brave and mutinie when the
partie with whom they are offended is not by.  These rhodomontados
must be employed on such as feare them.

  Mugitus veluti cum prima in praelia taurus

  Terrificos ciet, atqui irasci in cornua tentat,

  Arboris obnixus trunco, ventosque lacessit

  Ictibus, et sparsa ad pugnam proludit arena./3


----- 1 SEN.  Epist. lvi. 2 CLAUD. in En. 1. i. 48. 3 VIRG.
AEn. 1. xii. 103.

  As when a furious bull to his first combats mooves

  His terror-breeding lowes, his horne to anger prooves,

  Striving against a trees trunke, and the wind with strokes,

  His preface made to fight with scattered sand, provokes.


When I chance to be angrie it is in the earnestest manner that may be,
but yet as briefly and as secretly as is possible. I lose my selfe in
hastiness and violence, but not in trouble.  So that let me spend all
manner of injurious words at randome and without all heed, and never
respect, to place my points pertinently, and where they may doe most
hurt: for commonly I employ nothing but my tongue.  My boyes scape
better cheape in great matters then in small trifles.  Slight
occasions surprise me, and the mischiefs is that after you are once
falne into the pits it is no matter who thrusts in, you never cease
till you come to the bottome.  The fall presseth, hasteneth, mooveth,
and furthereth it selfe. In great occasions I am pleased that they are
so just, that every body expects a reasonable anger to insue.  I
glorify my selfe to deceive their expectation.  Against these I bandy
and prepare my selfe; they make me summon up my wits and threaten to
carry me very farre if I would follow them. I easily keepe my selfe
from falling into them, and if I stay for them I am strong enough to
reject the impulsion of this passion, what violent cause soever it
hath.  But if it seize upon and once preoccupate me, what vaine cause
soever it hath, it doth cleane transport me: I condition thus with
those that may contest with me, when you perceive me to be first
angry, be it right or wrong, let me hold on my course, I will do the
like to you whenever it shall come to my lot.  There is not engendred
but by the concurrencei of cholers, which are easily produced one of
another, and are not borne at one instant.  Let us allow every man his
course, so shall we ever be in peace.  Oh profitable prescription, but
of an hard execution!  I shall sometime seeme to be angry for the
order and direction of my house, without any just emotion.  According
as my age yeeldeth my humours more sharp and peevish, so do I endevour
to oppose my selfe against them and if I can I will hereafter enforce
my selfe to be lesse froward and not so testy, as I shall have more
excuse and inclinations to be so; although I have heretofore beene in
their number that are least.  A word more to conclude this chapter:
Aristotle saith choler+ doth sometimes serve as armes unto Vertue and
Valor.  It is very likely: notwithstanding such as gainsay him, answer
pleasantly, it is a weapon of a new fashion and strange use.  For we
moove other weapons but this mooveth us; our hand doth not guide it,
but it directeth our hand; it holdeth us, and we hold not it.

  CHAPTER 2.XXXII+ A DEFENCE OF SENECA+ AND PLUTARKE+


THE familiarity I have with these two men, and the aid they affoord me
in my old age, and my booke meerely framed of their spoiles, bindeth
me to wed and maintaine their honour.  As for Seneca, amongest a
thousand petty pamphlets those of the pretended reformed religion have
published, for the defence of their cause, which now and then proceede
from a good hand, and which, pity it is, it should not be employed in
more serious and better subjects, I have heretofore seene one who, to
prolong and fill up the similitude he would finde betweene the
government of our unfortunate late King Charles the Ninth and that of
Nero, compareth the whilom Lord Cardinall of Lorraine, unto Seneca;
their fortunes to have been both chiefe men in the government of their
Princes, and therewithall their manners, their conditions, and their
demeanours.  Wherein (in mine opinion) he doth the said Lord Cardinall
great honour: for although I be one of those that highly respect his
spirit his worth, his eloquence, his zeale towards his religion, and
the service of his King; and his good fortune to have beene borne in
an age wherein he was so new, so rare, and therewithall so necessary
for the commonwealth, to have a clergie man of such dignitie and
nobility, sufficient and capable of so weighty a charge; yet to
confesse the truth, I esteeme not his capacitie such, nor his vertue
so exquisitely unspotted, nor so entire or constante as that of
Seneca.  Now this booke whereof I speak, to come to his intention,
maketh a most injurious description of Seneca, having borrowed his
reproaches from Dion the historian, to whose testimony I give no
credit at all: for besides he is inconstant, as one who after he hath
called Seneca exceeding wise, and shortly after termed him a mortall
enemy to Neroes vices, in other places makes him covetous, given to
usurie, ambitious, base-minded, voluptuous, and under false pretences
and fained shewes, a counterfet philosopher; his vertue appeareth so
lively, and wisedome so vigorous in his writings, and the defence of
these imputations is so manifest, as wel of his riches as of his
excessive expences, that I beleeve no witnesse to the
contrary. Moreover, there is great reason we should rather give credit
to Romane historians in such things then to Graecians and strangers,
whereas Tacitus and others speake very honourably of his life and
death, and in other circumstance declare him to have beene a most
excellent and rarely vertuous man, I wil alleadge no other reproach
against Dion's judgement then this, which is unavoydable; that is, his
understanding of the Roman affaires is so weake and il advised as he
dareth defend and maintaine Julius Caesars+ cause against Pompey+, and
blusheth not to justifie Antonius+ against Cicero+. But let us come to
Plutarke.  John Bodin is a good moderne author, and endowed with much
more judgement then the common rabble of scriblers and blur-papers
which now adayes stuffe stationers shops, and who deserveth to be
judged, considered, and had in more then ordinary esteeme.
Neverthelesse I finde him somewhat malapert and bolde in that passage
of his 'Methods of Hisiorie,' when he accuseth Plutarke, not only of
ignorance (wherein I would have let him say his pleasure, for that is
not within my element, but also that he often writeth things
altogether incredible and meerely fabulous (these are his very words).
If he had simply said things otherwise then they are, it had been no
great reprehension; for what we have not seene we receive from others
and upon trust; and I see him sometime, wittingly and in good earnest,
report one and same story diversly; as the judgements of three best
captaines that ever were, spoken by Hanibal, is otherwise in Flaminius
his life, and otherwise in Pyrrhus. But to taxe him to have taken
incredible and impossible things for ready payment is to accuse the
most judicious author of the world of want of judgement.  And see here
his example: As, saith be, when he reports that a childe of Lacedemon
suffered all his belly and gutts to be torne out by a cubbe or young
foxe, which he bad stolne and kept close under his garment, rather
then he would discover his theft.  First, I finde this example ill
chosen; forasmuch as it is hard to limit the powers of the soules
faculties, whereas of corporall forces, we have more law to limite and
know them; and therefore had I been to write of such a subject, I
would rather have made choyce of an example of this second kinde.  And
some there be lesse credible.  As amongst others that which he
reported of Pyrrhus, who being sore wounded, gave so great a blow with
a sword unto one of his enemies, armed at all assayes and with all
pieces, as he cleft him from the crowns of the head downe to the
groine, so that the body fell in two pieces.  In which example I finde
no great wonder, nor do I admit of his excuse wherewith he cloaketh
Plutarke: to have added this word (as it is said) to forewarne us and
restraine our beliefe.  For if it be not in things received by
authoritie and reverence of antiquity or religion, neither would
himselfe have received nor proposed to us to believe things in
themselves incredible: and that (as it is said) hee doth not here
sette downe this phrase to that purpose, may easily be perceived by
what himselfe in other places telleth us upon the subject of the
Lacedemonian childrens patience, of examples happened in his time much
harder to be perswaded: as that which Cicero hath also witnessed
before him, because (as he saith) he had been there himselfe: that
even in their times there were children found prepared to endure all
manner of patience, whereof they made trial before Diana's altar, and
which suffered themselves to be whipped till the blood trilled downe
all parts of their body, not onely without crying, but also without
sobbing; and some who voluntarily suffered themselves to be scourged
to death.  And what Plutarke also reporteth, and a hundred other
witnesses averre, that assisting at a sacrifice, a burning coale
happened to fall into the sleeve of a Lacedemonian childe, as he was
busie at incensing, suffered his arme to burne so long untill the smel
of his burnt flesh came to all the by standers.  There was nothing,
according to their custome, so much called their reputation in
question, and for which they endured more blame and shame, than to be
surprised stealing.  I am so well instructed of those mens greatnes of
courage, that this report doth not only seeme incredible to me as to
Bodin, but I do not so much as deeme it rare, or suppose it strange.
The Spartane story is full of thousands of much more rare and cruell
examples; then according to this rate, it containeth nothing but
miracle.  Concerning this point of stealing, Marcellinus reporteth
that whilst hee lived there could never be found any kinde of torment
that might in any sort compell the Egyptians surprised filching (which
was much used amongst them) to confesse and tell but their names.  A
Spanish peasant being laide upon the racke about the complices of the
murther of the, Pretor Lucius Piso, in the midst of his torments cried
out his friends should not stir, but with all security assist him, and
that it was not in the power of any griefe or paine to wrest one word
of confession from him: and the first day nothing else could possibly
be drawn from him.  The next morrow, as he was led towarde the racke
to be tormented anew, he by strong violence freed himselfe from out
his keepers bands, and so furiously ranne with his bead against a
wall, that he burst his braines out, and presently fell down dead.
Epicharis having glutted and wearied the moody cruelty of Neroes
satellites or officers, and stoutly endured their fire, their
beatings, and their engines a whole day long without any one voyce or
word of revealing hir conspiracy, and the next day after, being againe
brought to the torture with her limbs bruised and broken, convayed the
lace or string of her gowne over one of the pillars of the chair
wherein she sate, with a sliding knot in it, into which sodainly
thrusting her head she strangled her selfe with the weight of her
body.  Having the courage to dye so, and steale from the first
torments, seemeth she not purposely to have lent her life to the trial
of her patience of the precedent day only to mocke that tyrant and
encourage others to attempt the like enterprise against him?  And he
that shall enquire of our argolettiers or freebooters what experiences
they have had in these our late civil wars, shall no doubt find
effects and examples of patience, of obstinacy and stif-necknednes in
these our miserable dayes, and amidst the effeminate and puling
wordlings far beyond the Egyptians, and well worthie to be compared to
those alreadie reported of Spartan vertue.  I know there have been
found seely hoores who have rather endure to have their feet broild
upon a gridyron, their finger ends crusht and wrung with the locke of
a pistoll, their eyes all bloody to be thrust out of their heads with
wringing and wresting of a cord-about their foreheads, before they
would so much as be ransomed.  I have seene and spoken with one who
had beene left all naked in a ditch for dead, his necke all bruised
and swolne, with a halter about it, wherewith he had beene dragged a
whole night at a horses taile through thick and thin, with a hundred
thrusts in his body given him with daggers, not to kill him outright,
but to grieve and terrifie him, and who had patiently endured all
that, and lost both speech and sense, fully resolved (as himselfe told
me) rather to die a thousand deaths (as verily, if you apprehend what
he suffered, he past more than one full death) then promise any
ransome; yet was he one of the wealthiest husbandman in all his
country.  How many have beene seene who have patiently endured to be
burnt and roasted for unknown and wilful opinions which they had
borrowed of others; my selfe have knowne a hundred and a hundred women
(for the saying is, Gaskoine heads have some prerogative in that) whom
you might sooner have made to bite a red-hot piece of iron than recant
an opinion they had conceived in anger.  They will be exasperated and
grow more fell against blowes and compulsion, and he who first
invented the tale of that woman which by no threats or stripes would
leave to call her husband pricke-lowse, and being cast into a pond and
duckt under water, lifted up her bands and jovning her two thumb-nails
in act to kill lice above her head, seemed to call him lousie still,
devised a fable whereof in truth we dayly see the expres image in
divers womens obstinacie and wilfulnesse.  And yet obstinacy is the
sister of constancy+, at least in vigor and stedfastnesse.  A man must
not judge that which is possible and that which is not according to
that which is credible and incredible to our sense and understanding,
as I have already said elsewhere.  And it is a great fault, wherein
the greater number of men doe dayly fall (I speake not this of Bodin)
to make a difficulty in believing that of others which themselves
neither can nor would doe.  Every man perswades himselfe that the
chiefe forme of humane nature is in himselfe; according to her must
all others be directed.  The proceedings that have no reference to
hers are false and fained.  Is any thing proposed unto him of another
mans faculties or actions?  The first thing he calls to the judgement
of his consultation is his owne examples; according as it goeth in
him, so goeth the worlds order.  Oh dangerous sottishnesse and
intollerable foppery!  I consider some men a farre-off, beyond and
above my selfe, namely amongst those ancient ones: and although I
manifestly acknowledge mine owne insufficiency to follow or come neere
them by a thousand paces, I cease not to keepe them still in view, and
to judge of those wardes and springs that raise them so high the
seedes whereof I somewhat perceive in my selfe as likewise I doe of
the mindes extreame basenes which amazeth me nothing at all, and I
misbelieve no more.  I see the turne those give to wind up themselves,
and I admire their greatnesse, and those starts which I perceive to be
so wondrous faire, I embrace them: and if with my strength I reach not
unto them, at least my judgement doth most willingly apply it selfe
unto them.  The other example he alledgeth of things incredible by
Plutarke, is that reported by Plutarke, that Agesilaus was fined by
the Ephories because he had drawne the hearts and good wills of all
his fellow-citizens unto himselfe alone.  I know not what marke of
falsehood or shew of impossibility he findes in it; but so it is that
Plutarke speaks there of things which in all likelyhood were better
knowne to him then to us: and as it was not strange in Greece to see
men punished and exiled onely because they were too popular and
pleased the common people over much.  Witnesse the Ostracisme amongst
the Athenians, and the Petalisme amongst the Siracusans.  There is
another accusation in the same place which for Plutarkes sake doth
somewhat touch me, where he saith that he hath very well and in good
truth sorted the Romanes with the Romanes, and the Graecians amongst
themselves, but not the Romanes with the Greacians, witnesse (saith
he) Demosthenes and Cicero, Cato and Aristides, Sylla and Lysander,
Marcellus and Pelopidas, Pompey and Aegisilaus, deeming thereby that
he hath favoured the Graecians by giving them so unequall companions.
It is a justreproving of that which is most excellent and commendable
in Plutarke: for in his comparisons (which is the most admirable part
of his worke, and wherein in mine opinion he so much pleased himselfe)
the faithfulnesse and sinceritie of his judgement equalleth their
depth and weight.  He is a Philosopher that teacheth us
vertue. {Plutark+} But let us see whether we can warrant him from this
reproch of prevarication and falsehood.  That which I imagine hath
given occasion or ground to this judgement is that great and
farre-spreading lustre of the Romane names, which still are tingling
in our ears and never out of our mindes.  Wee doe not thinke
Demosthenes may equall the glory of a consull, a proconsul and a
questor, of this great commonwealth of Rome.  But he that shall
impartially consider the truth of the matter, and men in themselves,
which Plutarke did cheiefly aime at, and more, to balance their
custome, their natural dispositions and their sufficiencie, then their
fortune: I am of a cleane opposite opinion to Bodin, and thinke that
Cicero and old Cato are much behind or short of their parallels.  For
this purpose I would rather have chosen the example of yong Cato
compared to Pbocion: for in that paire might well be found a more
likely disparitie for the Romanes advantage.  As for Marcellus, Sylla,
and Pompey, I see very well how their exploits of warre be more
swolne, glorious and pompous then the Graecians, whom Plutarke
compareth unto them; but the most vertuous and fairest actions, no
more in warre then elsewhere, are not alwaies the most famous.  I
often see the names of some captaines smothered under the brightnesse
of other names of lesser desert, witnesse Labienus, Ventidius+,
Telesinus, and divers others.  And to take him in that sense, were I
to complaine for the Graecians, might not I say that Camillus is much
lesse comparable unto Themistocles, the Gracchi to Agis and Cleomenes,
and Numa to Lycurgus?  But it is follie at one glance to judge of
things with so many and divers faces.  When Plutarke compares them, he
doth not for all that equall them.  Who could more eloquently and with
more conscience note their differences?  Doth he compare the
victories, the exploites of armes, the power of the armies conducted
by Pompey and his triumphs unto those of Agesilaus?  I do not believe
(saith he) that Xenophon himself (were he living) though it were
granted him to write his pleasure of Agesilaus durst ever dare to
admit any comparison betweene them: seemeth he to equall Lysander to
Sylla?  There is no comparison (saith he) neither in number of
victories nor hazard of battel betweene them: for Lysander onely
obtained two sea-battels, &c.  This is no derogation from the Romanes.
If hee have but simply presented them unto the Graecians, what ever
disparity may be between them, he hath not in any sort wronged them.
And Plutarke doth not directly counterpoise them.  In some there is
none preferred before others; hbe compareth the parts and the
circumstances one after another, and severally judgeth of them.  If
therefore any would goe about to convince him of favour, he should
narrowly sift out some particular judgement; or in generall and plaine
termes say, hee hath missed in sorting such a Graecian to such a
Romane, forasmuch as there are other more sortable and correspondent,
and might better be compared, as having more reference one unto
another.

  CHAPTER 2.XXXIII+ THE HISTORIE OF SPURINA


PHILOSOPHY thinketh she hath not il imployed hir meanes, having
yeelded the sovereign rule of our mind, and the authoritie to
restraine our appetites, unto reason.  Amongst which, those who judge
there is none more violent than those which love begetteth, have this
for their opinion, that they holde both of body and soule; and man is
wholly possessed with them: so that health it selfe depended of them,
and physick is sometimes constrained to serve them instead of a
Pandership. {lust+} But contrariwise, a man might also say that the
comixture of the body doth bring abatement and weaknesse unto them;
because such desires are subject to satiety and capable of materiall
remedies.  Many who have endevored to free and exempt their mindes
from the continuall alarumes which this appetite did assail them with,
have used incisions, yea and cut-off the mooving, turbulent and unruly
parts.  Others have alayed the force and fervency of them by frequent
applications of cold things, as snow and vinegar.  The haire-cloths
which our forefathers used to weare for this purpose, whereof some
made shirts, and some waste-bands or girdles, to torment their reines.
A prince told me not long since, that being very yong and waiting in
the Court of King Francis the First, upon a solemne festival day, when
all the Court endevored to be in their best clothes, a humor possessed
him to put on a shirt of haire-cloth, which he yet keepoth, and had
beene his fathers: but what devotion soever possessed him, he could
not possibly endure untill night to put it off againe, and was sick a
long time after, protesting he thought no youthly heat could be so
violent but the use of this receipt would coole and alay; of which he
perhaps never assayed the strongest?  For, experience sheweth us, that
such emotion doth often maintaine it selfe under base, rude, and
slovenly cloathes: and haire cloathes doe not ever make those poore
that weare them.  Zenocrates proceeded more rigorously; for his
Disciples, to make triall of his continencie, having convayed that
beauteous and famous curtizan Lais naked into his bed, saving the
weapons of her beauty, wanton allurements, and amorous or
love-procuring potions, feeling that, mugre all, philosophicalf
discourses and strict rules, his skittish body beganne to mutinie, he
caused those members to be burned which had listened to that
rebellion.  Whereas the passions that are in the minde, as ambition,
covetousnesse and others, trouble reason much more: for it can have no
ayde but from its owne meanes; nor are those appetites capable of
satiety but rather sharpened by enjoying and augmented by possession.
The example alone of Julius Caesar may suffice to show us the
disparitie of these appetites, for never was man more given to amorous
delights.  The curious and exact care he had of his body is an
authenticall witnesse of it, forsomuch as he used the most lascivious
meanes that then were in use; as to have the haires of his body
smeered and perfumed al over with an extreame and labored curiositie;
being of himselfe a goodly personage, white, of a tall and comely
stature, of a cheerefull and seemely countenance, his face ful and
round and his eies browne lively, if at least Suetonius may be
believed; for the statues which nowadaies are to be seene of him in
Rome answere not altogether this portraiture we speake of.  Besides
his wives, which he changed foure times, without reckoning the bies or
amours in his youth with Nicomedes King of Bythinia, he had the
maiden-head of that so farr and highly- renowned Queene of Egypt,
Cleopatra; witnesse yong Caesarion whom he begotte of hir.  He also
made'love unto Eunoe, Queene of Mauritania, and at Rome to Posthumia,
wife unto Servius Sulpitius: to Lolio, wife to Gabinius; to Tertulla,
of Crassus; yea unto Mutia, wife to great Pompey, which, as historians
say, was the cause hir Husband was divorced from her.  Which thing
Plutarke confesseth not to have knowne.  And the Curions both father
and sonne, twitted Pompey in the teeth, at what time he took Caesars
daughter to wife, that he made himselfe sonne in law to one who had
made him cuckold, and himself was wont to call Egyptus.  Besides all
this number, he entertained Servilia, the sister of Cato and mother to
Marcus Brutus, whence (as divers hold) proceedeth that great affection
he ever bare to Marcus Brutus; for his mother bare him at such a time
as it was not unlikely he might be borne of him.  Thus (as me seemeth)
have I good reason to deeme him a man extreamly addicted to all
amorous licenciousnesse, and of a wanton-lascivious complexion. But
the other passion of ambition, wherewith he was infinitely affected
and much tainted, when he came once to withstand the same it made him
presently to give ground.  And touching this point, when I call
Mahomet to remembrance (I meane him that subdued Constantinople, and
who brought the final extermination of the name of Graecians) I know
not where these two passions are more equal ballanced, equally an
indefatigable letcher and a never-tired souldier; but when in his life
they seeme to strive and concurre one with another, the mutinous heate
doth ever gourmandize the amorous flame.  And the latter, although out
of naturall season did never attain to a ful and absolute authority,
but when he perceived himself to be so aged that he was utterly unable
longer to undergoe the burthen of war.  That which is aleadged, as an
example on the contrary side, of Ladislaus, King of Naples, s very wel
worth the noting, who, though he were an excellent, courageous and
ambitious captaine, proposed unto himselfe, as the principall scope of
his ambition, the execution of his sensuality, and enjoying of some
rare and unmatched beauty.  So was his death: having by a continuall
tedious siege brought the city of Florence to so narrow a pinch that
the inhabitants were ready to yeeld him the victory, he yeelded the
same to them upon condition they would deliver into his hands a wench
of excellent beauty that was in the city, of whom he had heard great
commendations, which they were enforced to graunt him, and so by a
private injury to ward off the publike ruine of the city.  She was
daughter of a notable rare phisician and whilest he lived chiefe of
his profession who seeing himselfe engaged in so stuprous a
necessitie, resolved upon an haughty enterprise.  Whilst all were
busie adorning his daughter, and besetting her with costly jewels,
that she might the more delight and please this new kingly lover, he
also gave her an exquisitively-wrought and sweetly-perfuimed
handkercher, to use in their first approches and embracements, a thing
commonly in use amongst the women of that country.  This handkercher,
strongly empoysonped according to the cunning Skill of his art,
comming to wipe both their enflamed secret parts and open pores, did
so readily convay and disperse its poyson, that having sodainly
changed the heate into colde, they immediately deceased one in
anothers armes.  But I will now returne to Caesar+. His pleasures
could never make him lose one minute of an houre, nor turne one step
from the occasions that might in any way further his advancement.
This passion did so sovereignly oversway all others, and possessed his
mind with so uncontrouled an authority, that shee carryed him whither
she list.  Truely I am grieved when in other things I consider this
mans greatnesse, and the wondrous parts that were in him; so great
sufficiencie in all maner of knowledge and learning, as there is
almost no science wherein he hath not written. Hee was so good an
orator, that diverse have preferred his eloquence before Ciceroes; and
himselfe (in mine opinion) in that facultie thought himselfe nothing
short of him.  And his two Anti-Catoes were especially written to
over-ballance the eloquence which Cicero had emploied in his Cato.
And for all other matters, was ever minde so vigilant, so active, and
so patient of labour as his? And doubtlesse it was also embellished
with sundry rare seedes of vertue - I meane lively, naturall, and not
counterfeits.  He was exceeding sober, and so homely in his feeding,
that Oppius reporteth how upon a time, through a certaine cookes
negligence, his meate being dressed with a kind of medicinable oyle
instead of olive-oyle, and so brought to the boorde, although he found
it, yet he fed hartily of it only because he would noth shame his
hoste: another time he caused his baker to be whipped because he had
served him with other than common household bread.  Cato himselfe was
wont to say of him, that he was the first sober man had addrest
himselfe to the ruine of his country.  And whereas the same Cato
called him one day drunkard, it hapned in this maner.  Being both
together in the Senate house, where Catelines conspiracie was much
spoken of, wherein Caesar was greatly suspected to have a hand, a note
was by a friend of his brought, and in very secret sort delivered him,
which Cato perceiving, supposing it might be something that the
conspirators advertised him of, instantly summoned him to shew it,
which Caesar, to avoid a greater suspicion, refused not: it was by
chance an amorous letter which Servilia, Catoes sister, writ to him:
Cato having read it, threw it at him, saying, 'Hold it againe, thou
drunkard,' I say it was rather a word of disdaine and anger than an
reproch of this vice: as often we nickname that anger us with the
first nicknames of reproaches that come into our mouth, though meerely
impertinent to those with whom we fall out.  Considering that the vice
wherewith Cato charged him hath neare coherencie unto that wherein he
had surprised Caesar: for Venus and Bacchus (as the vulgar he saith)
agree well together; but with me, Venus is much more blithe and
gamesome, being accompanied with sobrietie.  The examples of his
mildenes and clemencie+ towards such as had offended him are infinite:
I meane, besides those he shewed during the civill warres, which (as
by his own writing may plainly appeare) he used to blandish and allure
his enemies, to make them feare his future domination and victories
the lesse.  But if any shall say those examples are not of validitie
to witnes his genuine and natural affabilitie, we may lawfully
answere, that at least they shew us a wonderfull confidence and
greatnes of courage to have been in him.  It hath often befalne him to
send whole armies backe again to his enemies after he had vanquished
them, without dayning to binde them so much as with an oath, if not to
favour, at least not to beare armes against him.  He hath three or
foure times taken some of Pompeyes chief captaines prisoners, and as
often set them at libertie againe.  Pompey declared all such as would
not follow and accompany him in his wars to be his enemies; and he
caused those to be proclaimed as friends who either would not stirre
at all, or not effectually arme themselves against him.  To such of
his captaines as fled from him, to procure other conditions, he sent
them their weapons, their horses, and all other furniture.  The
citties he had taken by maine force he freed to follow what faction
they would, giving them no other garison then the memorie of his
clemencie and mildnes.  In the day of his great battail of Pharsalia,
he expresly inhibited that, unles they were driven to unavoydalle
extremities no man should lay bands upon any Romane cittizen.  In my
judgemnt these are very hazardous partes, and it is no wonder if, in
the civill warres tumultuous broiles we have now on foote, those that
fight for the ancient lawes and state of their country as he did, doe
not follow and imitate the example.  They are extraordinary meanes,
and which onely belongs to Caesars fortune, and to his admirable
foresight, successfully to direct and happily to conduct them.  When I
consider the incomparable greatnesse and unvaluable worth of his
minde, I excuse Victorie in that shee could not well give him over in
this most unjust and unnatural cause.  But to returne to his clemencie
we have diverse genuine and lively examples, even in the time of his
al swaying government, when all things were reduced into his hands,
and bee needed no longer to dissemble.  Caius Memmius had written
certaine detracting and railing orations against him, which he at full
and most sharpely had answered, neverthelesse hee shortly after helped
to make him consul.  Caius Calvus, who had composed diverse most
injurious epigrams against him, having employed sundrie of his
friendes to bee reconciled to him againe, Caesar descended to write
first unto him.  And our good Catullus, who under the name of Mamurra
had so rudely and bitterly railed against him, at last comming to
excuse himselfe, Caesar that very night made him to suppe at his owne
table.  Having beene advertised how some were overlavish in rayling
against him, all he did was but in a publike oration to declare how he
was advertised of it.  His enemies he feared lesse than he hated them.
Certaine conspiracies and conventicles were made against his life,
which being discovered unto him, he was contented by an edict to
publish how he was thoroughly informed of them, and never prosecuted
the authors.  Touching the respect he ever bare unto his friends,
Caius Oppius travelling unto him, and falling very sick, having but
one chamber, he resigned the same unto him, and himselfe was contented
to lie all night abroade and upon the bare ground.  Concerning his
justice, he caused a servant of his whom he exceedingly loved, to be
executed, {Hal+} forsomuch as he had laine with the wife of a Roman
knight, although no man sued or complained of him.  Never was man that
showed more moderation in his victorie or more resolution in his
adverse fortune.  But all these noble inclinations, rich gifts, worthy
qualities, were altered, smothered, and eclipsed by this furious
passion of ambition; by which he suffred himselfe to be so farre
misled that it may be well affirmed she, onely, ruled the sterne of
all his actions.  Of a liberall man she made him a common theefe, that
so he might the better supply his profusion and prodigalitie; and made
him utter that vile and most injurious speech, that if the wickedest
and most pernicious men of the world had for his service and
furtherance beene faithfull unto him, he would to the utmost of his
power have cherished and preferred them as well as if they had beene
the honestest: it so besotted and, as it were, made him drunke with so
extreame vanitie, that in the presence of his fellow-citizens, he
durst vaunt himselfe to have made that great and farre-spread Romane
Commonwealth a shapelesse and bodilesse name, and pronounce that his
sentences or answeres should thenceforward serve as lawes; and sitting
to receive the whole bodie of the Senate comming toward him, and
suffer himselfe to be adored, and in his presence divine honours to be
done him.  To conclude, this only vice (in mine opinion) lost and
overthrew in him the fairest naturall and richest ingenuitie that ever
was, and hath made his memorie abominable to all honest mindes,
insomuch as by the ruine of his countrey and subversion of the
mightiest state and most flourishing commonwealth that ever the world
shall see, he went about to procure his glorie.  A man might
contrariwise finde diverse examples of greate persons, whom pleasure
hath made to forget the conduct of their owne affaires, as Marcus
Antonius and others: but where love and ambition should be in one
equall balance and with like forces mate one another, I will never
doubt but Caesar would gaine the prize and gole of the victorie. But
to come into my path again.  It is much, by discourse of reason, to
bridle our appetites, or by violence to force our members to containe
themselves within the bonds of dutie.  But to whippe us, for the
interest of our neighbours; not only to shake off this sweete pleasing
passion, which tickleth us with selfe-lioving pleasure we apprehend
and feele to see our selves gratefull to others and of all men beloved
and sued unto, but also to hate and scorne those graces which are the
cause of it, and to condemne our beauty because some others will be
set on fire with it, I have seene few examples like this.  Spurina, a
young gentleman of Tuscanie -

  Qualis gemma micat fulvum quae dividit aurum,

  Aut collo decus aut capiti vel quale per artem

  Inclusum buxo, aut Ericia terebintho,

  Lucet ebur/1

  ----- As when a precious stone cleare rayes doth spread,

  Set in pure golde, adorning necke or head

  Or as faire iv'ry shines in boxe enclos'd,

  Or workemanly with mountaine gumme dispos'd -


being endowed with so alluringly-excessive and singular beautie that
the chastest eyes could not possibly gainstand or continently resist
the sparkling glances thereof, not contented to leave so great a flame
succourlesse or burning fever remedilesse, which he in all persons and
every where enkindled, entered into so furious despite against
himselfe, and those rich gifts nature had so prodigally conferred upon
him (as if they must beare the blame of others faults that with gashes
and skars he wittingly mangled and voluntarily cut that perfect
proportion and absolute feature which nature had so curiously observed
in his unmatched face; whereof, to speak my opinion, such outrages are
enemies to my rules.  I rather admire than honour such actions.  His
intent was commendable and his purpose consciencious, but in my
seeming somewhat wanting of wisdome.  What, if his deformitie or
uglinesse was afterward an instrument to induce others to fall into
the sinne of contempt and vice of hatred, or fault of envy for the
glory of so rare commendation; or of slander, interpreting his humour
to be a frauncke ambition.  Is there any forme whence vice (if so it
please) may not wrest an occasion in some manner to exercise itselfe?
It had beene more just, and therewithall more glorious, of so rare
gifts of God to have made a subject of exemplary vertue and orderly
methode.  Those which sequester themselves from publike_offices+, and
from this infinite number of thornie and so many-faced rules which in
civile life binde a man of exact honesty and exquisite integrities in
mine opinion reape a goodly commoditie, what peculiar sharpe-nesse
soever

----- 1 VIRG.  AEn. 1. x. 134.

they enjoyne themselves.  It is a kinde of death to avoide the paine
of well doing or trouble of well living.  They may have another prise,
but the prise of uneasiness methinks they never had.  Nor that in
difficulty there be anything that is amid the waves of the worldly
multitude, beyond keeping himselfe upright and untainted, answering
loyally and truely discharging al members and severall parts of his
charge.  It is happily more easie for one in honest sort to neglect
and passe over all the sexe, than duely and wholly to maintaine
himselfe in his wifes company.  And a man may more incuriously fall
into povertie then into plenteousnesse; being justly dispenced.
Custome, according to reason, doth leade to more sharpnesse than
abstinence hath. Moderation is a vertue much more toylesome than
sufferance+. The chaste and well living of yong Scipio hath a thousand
severall fashions; that of Diogenes but one.  This doth by so much
more exceed all ordinary lives in innocencie and unspottednesse as
those which are most exquisite and accomplished exceed in profit and
out-goe it in force.

CHAPTER 2.XXXIV+ OBSERVATIONS CONCERNlNG THE MEANES TO WARRE+


AFTER THE MANNER OF JULIUS CAESAR

IT is reported of divers chiefs generals in warre that they have
particularly affected some peculiar book or other, as Alexander the
Great highly esteemed Homer; Scipio, Africanus, Xenophon; Marcus
Brutus, Polybius; Charles the Fifth, Philip de Comines: and it is
lately averred that in some places, and with some men, Machiavell is
much accompted of: but our late Marshall Strozzi, who had made
especiall choice to love Caesar, without doubt I thinke of all other
chose best, for truely he ought to be the breviary of all true
souldiers, as being the absolute and perfect chiefe patterne of
military profession.  And God hee knowes with what grace and with what
decorum he hath embellished this rich subject, with so pure a kinde of
speech, so pleasing and so absolutely perfect, that to my taste there
are no writings in the world which in this subiect may be compared to
his. I will heere register certaine particular and rare parts
concerning his maner of war, which yet remaine in my memory.  His
armie beeing somewhat afrighted upon the report that ranne of the
great forces which K.  Iuba brought against him, instead of abating
the opinion his souldiers had conceived of it, and to diminish the
meanes or forces of his enemie, having caused them to be assembled
altogether, thereby to assure and encourage them, he tooke a cleane
contrary course to that which in like cases we are accustomed to do,
for he had them trouble themselves no more to finde out the number of
the forces which his enemies brought against him, for himselfe had
already true knowledge and certaine intelligence of them, and told
them a number farre exceeding both the truth and report of them:
following what Cyrus commandeth in Xenophon.  Forasmuch as the deceit
is not of like interest, for a man to finde his enemies in effect
weaker than he hoped, then stronger indeed having once conceived an
opinion of their weaknesse.  He enured all his souldiers simply to
obey, without controling, gaine-saying, or speaking of their captaines
desseignes, which he never communicated unto them, but upon the last
point of execution; and was pleased, if by chance they had any inkling
of them, so to deceive them.  Presently to change his opinion: and
having prefixed a place to quarter in at night, he hath often beene
seene to march further, and lengthen his journey, namely if the
weather were foule, or if it rained.  The Swizzers in the beginning of
his warres in Gaule, having sent toward him to give them free passage
through the Romane countries, and he being resolved by force to
empeach them, did notwithstanding shew them very good lookes, and
tooke certaine dayes respit to give them an answer.  During which time
he might have leisure to assemble his armie together.  These poore
people knew not how wel he could husband time: for he often repeated
that the skill to embrace occasions in the nick is the chiefest part
of an absolute captaine: and truly the diligence he used in his
exploit is incredible, and the like was never heard of.  If he were
not over-consciencious in that under colour of some treatie, parle or
accord, to take any advantage of his enemies, he was as little
scrupulous in that he required no other vertue in his souldiers but
valour; and except mutinie and disobedience he punished not greatly
other vices.  After his victories he often gave them the reines to all
licenciousness, for a while dispencing them from all rules of military
discipline; saying, moreover, his souldiers were so well instructed
that though they were in their gayest clothes, pranked up, muskt and
perfumed, they would, notwithstanding, runne furiously to any combate.
And in truth he loved to see them richly armed, and made them weare
gilt, graven and silvered armours, that their care to keepe them
cleane and bright might make them more fierce and readie to defend
themselves.  Speaking to them, he ever called them by the name of
fellow soldiers, {common+} a name used at this day by some captaines;
which his successor Augustus afterward reformed, esteeming he had done
it for the necessitie of his affaires, and to flatter the hearts of
those which followed him but voluntarily.

  -----Rheni mihi Caesar in undis,

  Dux erat, hic socius facinus quos inquinat, aequat./1


  When Caasar past the Rheine he was my generall,

  My fellow heere; sinne whom it staines makes fellowes-all.

But this custome was over-lowlie for the dignitie of an emperor and
chiefe generall of an armie, and he brought up the fashion againe to
cal them only souldiers.  To this curtesie, Caesar did,
notwithstanding intermixe a great severity to suppresse and keep them
humble.  His ninth legion having mutinied neere unto Placentia, he
presently cassiered the same with great ignominie unto it,
notwithstanding that Pompey were yet on foot and strong; and would not
receive it into favour but with humble petition and entreaties. Hee
did more appease them by authoritie and audacitie than by mildnesse
and affabilitie.  Where he speaketh of his passage over the river of
Rheine, towards Germanie, he saith that, deeming it unworthy the
honour of the Romane people his army should pass over in shippes, he
caused a bridge to be built, that so it might passe over drie-foot.
There he erected that admirable bridge whereof he so particularly
describeth the same: for he never more willingly dilates himselfe in
describing any of his exploites then where he endevoreth to represent
unto us the subtilitie of his inventions in such kindes of manuall
workes.  I have also noted this his booke, that he much accompteth of
his exhortations he made

----- 1 LUCAN. 1. v. 289.

to his souldiers before any fight, for where he would shew to have
beene either surprised or urged, he ever alledgeth this, that he had
not so much leisure as to make an oration to his souldiers or armie:
before that great battle against those of Touruay, Caeser (saith he)
having disposed of the rest, ranne sodaineli whither fortune carried
him, to exhort his men, and meeting with the tenth legion, he had not
leisure to say any thing else unto them but that they should remember
their former wonted vertue, they should nothing be danted, they should
stoutly resist the encounter of their adversaries; and forsomuch as
the enemie was come within an arrow-shot unto him, he gave the signal
of the battel; and sodainely going elsewere to encourage others, he
found them already together by the eares: see here what himself saith
of it in that place.  Verely his tongue hath in diverse places much
bestead, and done him notable service, and even whilst he lived his
military eloquence was so highly regarded that many of his armie were
seene to copie and keepe his orations; by which meanes diverse volumes
were filled with them, and continued many ages after his death, his
speech and particular graces, so that his familiar friends, and namely
Augustus, bearing that rehearsed which had beene collected of his,
knew by the phrases and words what was his or not.  The first time
that with any publike charge he issued out of Rome, he came in eight
dayes to the river of Rhone, having ever one or two secretaries before
him, who continually writ what he endited, and one bebinde him that
carried his sword.  And surely if one did nothing but runne up and
downe, he could very hardly attaine to that promptitude wherewith ever
being victorious, having left Gaule, and following Pompey to
Brundusium, in eighteene dayes he subdued all Italie; returned from
Brundusium to Rome, and thence went even to the heart of Spaine, where
he passed many extreme difficulties in the warres betweene Afranius
and Petreius, and at the long siege of Marseille; from whence he
returned into Macedon, overthrew the Romane armie at Pharsalia; thence
pursuing Pompey he passed into Egypt, which he subdued; from Egypt he
came into Syria, and into the countrie of Pontus; where hee fought
with Pharnaces; thence into Affrica, where he defeated Scipio and
Iuba; and thence through Italie he returned into Spaine, where he
overthrew Pompeyes children

  Ocior et caeli flammis et tigride faeta,

  Ac veluti montis saxum de vertice praeceps

  Cum ruit avulsum vento, seu turbidus imber

  Proluit, aut annis solvit sublapsa vetustas,

  Fertur in abruptum magno mons improbus actu,

  Exultatque solo, silvas, armenta, virosque,

  Involvens secum./1

  Swifter then breed-yong tiger, or heav'ns flash,

  And as from mountaines top a headlong stone,

  Rent-off by winds, or by stormes troublous dash

  Washt-off, or loos'd by age of yeares are gone,

  Crosse-carried with great force that hill-like masse

  Bounds on the earth, and rowles with it in one

  Woods, herds, and men, and all that neere it was.

Speaking of the siege of Avaricum, he saith that it was his custome,
both day and night, ever to be neere and about such workemen as he had
set a worke.  In all enterprises of consequence he was ever the first
skout-man or surveyer of any place; and his armie never approched
place which he had not viewed or survayed himselfe.  And if wee may
believe Suetonius, at what time he attempted to passe over into
England he was the first man that sounded the passage.  He was wont to
say that he esteemed that victory much more which was conducted by
advise and managed by counsell, then by maine strength and force.  In
the warre against Petreius and Afranius, fortune presenting an
apparent occasion of advantage unto him, he saith that he refused it,
hoping, with a little more time, but with lesse hazard, to see the
overthrow of his enemie.  Where he also plaid a notable part, to

----- 1 LUCAN. 1. iv. 505; VIRG.  AEn. 1. xii. 684.

  command all his armie to swimme over a river without any necessitie.

  ----- rapuitque ruens in praelia miles,

  Quod fugiens timuisset iter, mox uda receptis

  Membra fovent armis, gelisque a gurgite cursu

  Restituunt artus,/1

  The Souldier rides that way in hast to fight

  Which yet he would have feared in haste of flight

  His limbs with water wet and cold before,

  With armes he covers, running doth restore.

I finde him somewhat more warie and considerate in his enterprises
then Alexander; for the latter seemeth to seeke out, and by maine
force to runne into dangers, as an impetuous or raging torrent, which
without heede, discretion, or choise, shockes and checkinates whate'er
it meeteth withall.

  Sic tauriformis volvitur Aufidus,

  Qui Regna Dauni perfluit Appuli,

  Dum saevit, horrendamque cultis

  Diluviem meditator agris./2

  So Bull-fac'd Aufidas still rowling growes,

  Which through Apulias ancient kingdome flowes,

  When he doth rage in threatning meditation

  To bring on fair fields fearefull inundation.

And to say truth, his hap was to be most employed in the spring time
and first heate of his age: whereas Caesar was well strucken in yeares
when he beganne to follow armes.  Alexander was of a more cholerike,
sanguine and violent constitution, while humour hee stirred up with
wine, whereof Caesar was very abstinent.  But where occasions of
necessitie were offered, and where the subject required it, there was
never man that so little regarded his person.  As for me, me seemeth I
reade in diverse of his exploits a certaine resolution rather to lose
himselfe then to abide the brunt or shame to be overthrowne.  In that
great battel which he fought against those of Turnay, seeing the
vanguard of his army somewhat enclining to route, even as

----- 1 LUCAN. 1. iv. 151. 2 HOR.  Car. 1. iv.  Od. xiv. 25.

be was, without shield or target, he ranne headlong to the front of
his enemies; which many other times happened unto him.  Hearing once
how his men were besieged, he past disguised through the midst and
thickest of his enemies campe, so to encourage and awe them with his
presence.  Having crossed the way to Dyrrhachium, with very few
forces, and perceiving the rest of his army (the conduct whereof hee
had left unto Antonius, to be somewhat slow in comming, he undertooke
all alone to repasse the sea, notwithstanding a violent and raging
tempest; and secretly stole himselfe away to fetch the rest of his
forces: all the havens on that side, yea and all the sea, being
possessed by Pompey.  And concerning the enterprises he underwent with
armed hand, there are divers of them, which in respect of the hazard,
exceede all discourse of military reason: for, with how weake meanes
undertooke he to subdue the kingdom of Egypt, and afterward to front
the forces of Scipio and Iuba, which were tenne parts greater than
his?  Mee thinkes such men have had a kinde of more than humane
confidence of their fortune: and himselfe was wont to say that haughty
enterprises were to be executed and not consuIted upon.  After the
battell of Pharsalia, having sent his armie before into Asia and
himselfe with onely one ship passing through the strait of Hellespont,
he met on the seas with Lucius Cassius, attended on with ten tall
shippes of warre; he was so farre from shunning him, that he durst not
only stay for him, but with all haste make toward and summon him to
yeeld himselfe to his mercie, which he did.  Having undertaken that
furious siege of Alesia, wherein were fourescore thousand men of
defence, and all France up in armes, with a resolution to runne upon
him and raise the siege, and having an armie on foote of one hundred
and nine thousand horse, and two hundred fortie thousand foote; what a
fond hardy and outrageous confidence was it in him that he would never
give over his attempt and resolve in two so great difficulties
together?  Which he notwithstanding underwent; and after he bad
obtained so notable a battell of those which were without, be soone
reduced those that were besieged in the towne to his mercy.  The very
like happened to Lucullus at the siege of Tigranocerta, against King
Tigrane, but with an unlike condition, seeing his enemies
demissenesse, with whom Lucullus was to deale.  I will heere note two
rare and extraordinary events touching the siege of Alesia; the one,
that the French men being all assembled together with a purpose to
meet with Caesar, having diligently survaied and exactly numbered all
their forces, resolved in their counsell to cutte off a great part of
this huge multitude for feare they might breed a confusion. This
example is new, to feare to be over-many; yet if it be well taken, it
is very likely that the bodie of an armie ought to have a
well-proportioned greatnesse, and ordered to indifferent bounds.
Whether it he for the difficulty to feed the same or to lead it in
order and keepe it in awe, and we may easily verifle by examples that
these numerous and infinite armies have seldome brought any notable
thing to passe: according to Cyrus his saying in Xenophon.  It is not
the multitude of men, but the number of good men, that causeth an
advantage: the rest rather breeding confusion and trouble than helpe
or availe.  And Bajazeth tooke the chiefest foundation of his
resolution, against the advice of all his captaines, to joyne fight
with Tamburlane, onely because the innumerable number of men which his
enemie brought into the field gave him an assured hope of rout and
confusion. Scanderbeg, a sufficient and most expert judge in such a
case, was wont to say that tenne or twelve thousand trusty and
resolute fighting men ought to suffice any sufficient chieftaine of
warre to warrant his reputation in any kinde of military exploite.
The other point, which seemeth to be repugnant both unto custome and
reason of warre, is, that Vercingentorix, who was appointed chiefe
generall of all the forces of the revolted Gaules, undertooke to
immure and shutte himselfe into, Alesia.  For he that hath the
commandement of a whole countrie ought never to engage himselfe,
except in cases of extremities and where all his rest and last refuge
goeth on it, and hath no other hope left him but the defence of such a
place. Otherwise he ought to keepe himselfe free, that so he may have
meanes to provide in all parts of his government.  But to returne to
Caesar: he became in time somewhat more slow, heedy, and considerate,
as witnesseth his familiar friend Oppius; deeming he should not so
easily hazard the honour of so many victories, which one onely
disaster or misencounter might make him lose.  It is that the Italians
are wont to say, when they will or blame or reproach any man with this
overdaring or rash fond-hardinesse, which is often seene in yong men,
calling them bisognosi d'onore, {Hotspur+} as much to say as needy of
honour: and that being yet hungrier greedy, and voyd of reputation,
they have reason to seeke after it, whatsoever it may cost them; which
they should never doe that have already acquired the same.  There may
be some just moderation in this desire of glory, and some satietie in
this appetite as wel as in others; diverse doe so practize it.  He was
farre from that religion of the ancient Romans who in their warres
would never prevaile but with meere and genuine vertue: but rather
joyned more conscience unto it than nowadaies we should doe; and would
never allow of all meanes were he never so certaine to get the
victory. In his warres against Ariovistus, whilest he was in parly
with him, some tumult or insurrection happened between the two armies,
which beganne by the fault or negligence of some of Ariovistus
horsmen.  In which hurlie-burlie Caesar found himselfe to have a great
advantage over his enemies, which notwithstanding he would not
embrace, for feare he might be taxed or suspected to have proceeded
falsly or consented to any trechery.  At what time soever hee went to
fight, he was accustomed to weare a very rich garment, and of a sheene
and garish colour, that so he might the better be marked.  When his
souldiers were neerest unto their enemies he restrained and kept them
very short.  When the ancient Graecians would accuse or taxe any man
of extreme insufficiencies they used this common proverbe, that he
could neither reade nor swimme: and himselfe was of this opinion, that
the arte of swimming was most necessary and beneficiarie in war: and a
souldier might reape diverse commodities by it, if he were in haste,
and to make speed, he would ordinarily swimme over al the rivers he
met withal; and loved greatly to travell on foote, as Alexander the
great was wont. In Egypt, being on a time forced (to save himselfe) to
leap into a little wherry or bote, and so many of his people following
him that he was in danger to sink, he rather chose to fling himself
into the sea, which he did; and swimming came into his fleete, that
was more than two hundred paces from him, holding his writing tables
in his left hand out of the water, and with his teeth drawing his
coate of armes after him, that his enemies might not enjoy it: and
this did he being well stricken in yeares. No generall of warre had
ever so much credit with his souldiers.  In the beginning of his
civill warres, his centeniers offered him every one at their owne
charges to pay and find him a man at armes, and his footemen to serve
him for nothing, and those that were best able, to defray the poore
and needy.  Our late admirall of France, Lord Chastillon, in our late
civill warres shewed such an example: for the Frenchmen of his army,
at their proper cost and charges, helped to pay such strangers as
followed him.  Few examples of so loving and earnest affection may bee
found amongst those that follow the old manner of warre, and strictly
hold themselves under the ancient pollicie of their lawes. Passion
hath more sway over us then reason: yet hath it chanced in the war
against Hannibal, that, imitating the example of the Romane peoples
liberalitie in the citie, the souldiers and captaines refused their
pay, and in Marcellus his campe, those were called mercenary that
tooke any pay.  Having had some defeate neere unto Dyrrachium, his
souldiers came voluntarily before him, and offered themselves to be
punished; so that he was more troubled to comfort then to chide them.
One onely of his cohortes (whereof ten went to a legion) held fight
above foure howres with foure of Pompeys whole legions, until it was
well- nigh all defeated with the multitude and force of arrowes: and
in his trenches were afterward found one hundred and thirtie thousand
shafts.  A souldier of his, named Scaeva, who commanded one of the
entrances, did so invincibly defend and keepe himselfe, that he had
one of his eyes thrust out, and one shoulder and one thigh thrust
through, and his shield flawed and pearced in two hundred and thirtie
severall places. {constancie+} It hath befallen to many of his
souldiers, being, taken prisoners, to chuse rather to die then promise
to follow any other faction, or receive any other entertainment.
Granius Petronius, taken by Scipio in Affrike, after Scipio had caused
all his fellowes to bee put to death, sent him word that gave him his
life, forsomuch as he was a man of ranke and a questor: Petronius
answered that Caesars souldiers were wont to give life to others, and
not accept it themselves; and therewithall with his owne hands killed
himselfe.  Infinite examples there are of theirfidelitie+. That part
which they, acted who were besieged in Salona, a citie which tooke
part with Caesar against Pompey, must not be forgotten, by reason of a
rare accident that there hapned.  Marcus Octavius, having long time
beleagred the town, they within were reduced to such extreamitie and
pinching necessitie of all things, that to supply the great want they
had of men, most of them being alreadie or hurt or dead; they had set
all their slaves at libertie, and for the beboofe of their engines
were compelled to cut off all their womens haires, to make ropes with
them; besides a wonderfull lacke of victualls, resolving
notwithstanding never to yeeld themselves: after they had a long time
lingered the siege, and that Octavius was thereby become more
carelesse, and lesse heeding or attentive to his enterprise, they one
day about high noone (having first ranged their wives and children
upon the walles, to set the better face upon the matter) rushed out in
such a furie upon the besiegers, that having put to rout and defeated
the first, the second, and third corps de garde, then the fourth and
the rest, and having forced them to quit their trenches, chased them
even to their shippes: and Octavius with much adoe saved himselfe in
Dyrrachium, where Pompey was.  I remember not at this time to have
read of any other example where the beleagred doe in grosse beate the
beleagrers, and get the maistry and possession of the field nor that a
sallie hath drawne a meere and absolute victory of a battell into
consequence.

CHAPTER 2.XXXV+ OF THREE GOOD WOMEN



THEY are not to be had by dozens, as each one knowes, namely, in
rights and duties of mariage; for it is a bargaine full of so many
thornie circumstances, that it is hard the will of a woman should long
keepe her selfe whole and perfect therein.  And although men have
somewhat a better condition in the same, yet have they much to doe.
The touchstone and perfect triall of a goode marriage respects the
time that the societie continueth; whether it have constantly beene
milde, loyall and commodious.  In our age they more commonly reserve
to enstall their good offices, and set forth the vehemence of their
affections toward their lost husbands: and then seeke they at least to
yeeld some testimonie of their good wil.  O late testimonie and out of
season, whereby they rather shew they never love them but when they
are dead!  Our life is full of combustion and scolding, but our
disease is full of love and of curtesie.  As fathers conceale
affection toward their children, so they, to maintaine an honest
respect, cloake tbeir love toward their husbands.  This mystery
answereth not my taste.  They may long enough scratch and dishevel
themselves; let me enquire of a chamber- maide or of a secretarie how
they were, how they did, and how they have lived together. I can never
forget this good saying: Iactantius maerent, quae minus dolent: 'They
keepe a howling with most ostentation who are less sorrowfull at
heart.  Their lowring and puling is hatefull to the living and vaine
to the dead.  Wee shall easily dispence with them to laugh at us when
we are dead, upon condition they smile upon us while wee live.  Is not
this the way to revive a man with spite; that he who hath spitten in
my face when I was living shall come and claw my feet when I am dead?
If there be any honour for a woman to weepe for hir husband, it
belongs to hir that hath smiled upon him when she had him. Such as
have wept when they lived, let them laugh when they are dead, as well
outwardly as inwardly.  Moreover, regard not those blubbred eyes, nor
that pitty moving voice, but view that demeanour, that colour and
cheerefull good plight of those cheekes under their great vailes;
thence it is she speaks plaine_French+. There are few whose health
doth not daily grow better and better; a qualitie that cannot lie.
This ceremonious countenance looketh not so much backward as forward:
it is rather a purchase than a payment. In mine infancie an honest and
most faire ladie (who yet liveth) the widdowe of a prince, had
somewhat more of I wot not what in her attires then the lawes of
widdowhood would well permit.  To such as blamed her for it, it is
(said shee) I intend no more new acquaintances, and have no mind at
all to marry againe.  Because I will not altogether dissent from our
custome, I have heere made choice of three women who have also
employed the, utost endeavor of their goodnes and affection about
their husbands deaths.  Yet are they examples somewhat different and
so urging that they hardly draw life into consequence.  Plinie the
yonger had dwelling neere to a house of his in Italie a neighbour
wonderfully tormented with certaine ulcers which much troubled him in
his secret parts.  His wife perceiving him to droope and languish
away, entreated im she might leasurely search, and neerely view the
quality of his disease, and she would more freely then any other tell
him what he was to hope for: which having obtained and curiously
considered the same, she found it impossible ever to be cured, and all
he might expect was but to lead a long, dolorous, and languishing
life: and therefore, for his more safetie and soveraigne remedie,
perswaded him to kill himselfe.  And finding him somewhat nice and
backeward to effect so rude an enterprise: 'Thinke not my deare friend
(quoth shee) but that the sorrowes and griefe I see thee feel, touch
me as neere and more, if more may be, as thy selfe, and that to be rid
of them I will applie the same remedie to my selfe which I prescribe
to thee.  I will accompany thee in thy cure as I have done in thy
sickness: remoove all feare, and assure thy selfe we shall have
pleasure in this passage, which shall deliver us from all torments,
for we will happily goe together.  That said, and having cheared up
hir husbands courage, she determined they should both headlong throw
themselves into the sea from out a window of their house that
overlooked the same: and to maintaine this loyall, vehement and never
to be severed affection to the end, wherewith shee had during his life
embraced him, she would also have him die in hir armes: and fearing
they might faile her, and through the fall or feare or apprehension
her bold-fast might be loosed, shee caused herselfe to be fast bound
unto him by the middle: and thus for the ease of her husbands life she
was contented to foregoe her owne.  She was but of meane place and low
fortune, and amidde such condition of people it is not so strange to
see some parts of rare vertue and exemplar goodnesse.

  ----- extrema per illos

  Iustitia excedens terris vestigia fecit./1

  Justice departing from the earth did take

  Of them her leave, through them last passage make.

The other two are noble and rich; where examples of vertue are rarely
lodged.  Arria, wife unto Cecinna Paetus, a man that had been consul,
was mother of another Arria, wife to Thrasea Paetus, whose vertue was
so highly renowned during the time of Nero; and by meane of his
sonne-in-law, grandmother to Fannia.  For the resemblance of these
mens and womens names and fortunes hath made diverse to mistake
them. 'This first Arria, her husband Cecinna Paetus having been

----- 1 VIRG.  Geor. 1. ii. 473.

taking Prisoner by the souldiers of Claudius the Emperour, after the
overthrow of Scribonianus, whose faction he had followed, entreated
those who led him prisoner to Rome to take her into their ship where
for the service of her husband she should be of lesse charge and
incommoditie to them then a number of other persons which they must
necessarily have, and that she alone might supply and stead him in his
chamber, in his kitchen and all other offices; which they utterly
refused, and so hoisted sailes, but she leaping into a fishers boate
that she immediately hired, followed him aloofe from the further shore
of Sclavonia.  Being come to Rome one day in the Emperours presence,
Iunia, the widdow of Scribonianus, by reason of the neerenesse and
societie of their fortunes, familiarly accosted her, but she rudely,
with these words, thrust her away.  What (quoth she) shall I speake to
thee, or shall I listen what thou sayest? 'Thou, in whose lappe
Scribonianus thy husband was slaine' and thou yet livest? and thou
breathest? These words with divers other signes made her kinsfolkes
and friends perceive that she purposed to make herselfe away, as
impatient to abide ber husbands fortune.  And Thrasea her son in law,
taking hold of her speeches, beseeching her that she would not so
unheedily spoile her selfe, he thus bespake her: 'What, if I were in
Cecinnaes fortune or the like, would you have my wife your daughter to
do so? 'What else?  Make' you a question of it? answered she. 'Yes,
marry would I had she lived so long and in so good-agreeing sort with
thee as I have done with my husband.  These and such like answers
encreased the care they had of her and made them more heedful to watch
and neerely to look unto her.  One day after she had uttered these
words to her keepers, 'You may looke long enough to me, well may you
make me die worse, but you shall never be able to keep me from dying:'
and therewith furiously flinging her self out of a chaire (wherein she
sate) with all the strength she had, she fiercely ranne her head
against the next wall; with which blow having sore hurt her selfe, and
falling into a dead swowne, after they had with much adoe brought her
to her selfe againe: 'Did I not tell you (quoth she) that if you kept
me from an easie death I would choose another how hard and difficult
soever?  The end of so admirable a vertue was this.  Her husband
Paetus wanting the courage to doe himselfe to death, unto which the
Emperors cruelty reserved him, one day, having first employed
discourses and exhortations befitting the counsell she gave him to
make himselfe away, shee tooke a dagger that her husband wore, and
holding it right out in her hand for the period of her exhortation:
Doe thus, Paetus (said she) and at that instant stabbing her selfe
mortally to the heart, and presently pulling the dagger out againe,
she reached the same unto her husband and so yeelded up the ghost,
uttering this noble, generous, and immortal speech, Paete non dolet,
she had not the leasure to pronounce other than these three wordes, in
substance materiall and worthy herselfe, 'Holde Paetus it hath done me
no hurt.

  Casta suo gladium cum traderet Arria Paeto,

  Ouem de visceribus traxerat ipsa suis;

  Si qua fides, vulnus quod feci, non dolet, inquit.

  Sed quod tu facies, id mihi Paete dolet./1

  Chast Arria, when she gave her Paetus that sharpe sword,

  Which from her bowells she had drawne forth bleeding new,

  The wound I gave and have, if you will trust my word

  Grieves not, said she, but that which shall be made by you.

It is much more lively in his owne naturall and of a richer sense, for
both her husbands wound and death, and her owne hurts, she was so
farre from grieving to have beene the counselor and motive of them,
that shee rejoyced to have performed so haughty and courageous an act,
onely for the behoofe of her deere husband; and at the last gasps of
her life she only regarded him, and to remove all feare from him to
follow her in death, which Paetus bebolding, he immediately wounded

----- 1 MART. 1. ii Epig. xiv.

himself with the same dagger, ashamed, as I suppose, to have had need
of so deare an instruction and precious a teaching.  Pompea Paulina,
an high and noble borne yong Romane ladie, had wedded Seneca, being
very aged. Nero, his faire disciple, having sent his satellites or
officers toward him to denounce the decree of his death to him, which
in those dayes was done after this manner: when the Roman Emperors had
condemned any man of quality to death, they were wont to send their
officers unto him to chuse what death he pleased, and to take it
within such and such a time, which, according to the temper of their
choler, they prescribed unto him sometimes shorter and sometimes
longer, giving him that time to dispose of his affaires, which also by
reason of some short warning they divers times tooke from him: and if
the condemned partie seemed in any sort to strive against their will,
they would often send men of purpose to execute him, either cutting
the veins of his armes and legs, or compelling him to take and swallow
poison.  But men of Honour stayed not that enforcement, but to that
effect used their own Phisitians or Surgeons, Seneca, with a reposed
and undanted countenance, listned attentively to their charge, and
presently demaunded for paper and inke to make his last wil and
testament, which the captaine refusing him, he turned towards his
friends and thus bespoke them: 'Sith, my loving friends, I cannot
bequeath you any other thing in remembrance or acknowledgement of what
I owe you, I leave you at least the richest and best portion I have,
that is, the image of my maners and my life, which I beseech you to
keepe in memory; which doing you may acquire the glory and purchase
the name of truly sincere and absolutely true friends.  And
therewithall, sometimes appeasing the sharpenes of the sorow he saw
them endure for his sake, with mild and gentle speeches, sometimes
raising his voice to chide them. 'Where are,' said he 'those memorable
precepts of Philosophy?  What is become of those provisions which for
so many yeares together we have laid up against the brunts and
accidents of Fortune?  Was Neroes innated cruelty unknowne unto us?
What might we expect or hope for at his hands, who had murdred his
mother and massacred his brother, but that he would also do his tutor
and governor that hath fostred and brought him up?  Having uttered
these words to all the bystanders, he turned him to his wife, as she
was ready to sink down, and with the burthen of her grief to faint in
heart and strength; he called and embraced her about the necke, and
heartily entreated her, for the love of him, somewhat more patiently
to beare this accident; and that his houre was come, wherein be must
shew no longer by discourse and disputation, but in earnest effect,
declare the fruit he had reaped by his studie; and that undoubtedly he
embraced deathe, not only without griefe but with exceeding joy.
Wherefore; my deere deere heart, do not dishonour it by thy teares,
lest thou seeme to love thyselfe more than my reputation.  Asswage thy
sorrowes and comfort thy self, in the knowledge thou hast had of me
and of my actions, leading the rest of thy life by the honest
occupations to which thou art addicted.  To whom Paulina, having
somewhat rouzed hir drooping spirits, and by a thrice noble affection
awakened the magnanimitie of her high-setled courage, answered thus :
'No, Seneca, thinke not that in this necessitie I will leave you
without my company.  I would not have you imagine that the vertuous
examples of your life have not also taught me to die; and when shall I
be able to do it or better, or more honestly, or more to mine own
liking then with your selfe?  And be resolved I wil go with you and be
partaker of your fortune.  Seneca taking so generous a resolve and
glorious a determination of his wife in good part, and to free
himselfe from the feare he had to leave her after his death to his
enemies mercie and cruelty: 'Oh my deare Paulina, I had,' quoth be,
'perswaded thee what I thought was convenient, to leade thy life more
happily, and doest thou then rather choose the honour of a glorious
death?  Assuredly I will not envy thee.  Be the constancie and
resolution answerable to our common end, but be the beautie and glory
greater on thy side.  That said, the veines of both their armes were
cut, to the end they might bleede to death; but because Senecaes were
somewhat shrunken up through age and abstinence, and his bloud could
have no speedy course, he commannded the veines of his thighes to be
launced; and fearing lest the torments he felt might in some sort
entender his wifes heart, as also to deliver himselfe from the
affliction which greatly yearned him to see her in so pittious plight,
after he had most lovingly taken leave of her, he besought her to be
pleased she might be carried into the next chamber, which was
accordingly performed.  But all those incisions being unable to make
him die, he wille Statius Anneus his phisitian to give him some
poysoned potion which wrought but small effect in him for through the
weaknesse and coldenesse of his members, it could not come unto his
heart.  And therefore they caused a warme hath to be prepared, wherein
they layd him, then perceiving his end to approach, so long as he had
breath he continued his excellent discourses concerning the subject of
the estate wherein he found himself, which his secretaries, so long as
they could heare his voice, collected very diligently, whose last
words continued long time after in high esteem and honor amongst the
better sort of men, as oracles; but they were afterward lost, and
great pittie it is they never came unto our handes.  But when he once
beganne to feele the last pangs of death, taking some of the water
wherein he lay bathing, all bloody, he therewith washed his head,
saying, 'I vow this water unto Jupiter the Deliverer.  Nero being
advertised of all this, fearing lest Paulinaes death (who was one of
the best alied ladies in Rome, and to whom he bare no particular
grudge) might cause him some reproach, sent in all poste baste to have
her incisions closed up againe, and if possible it could be, to save
her life, which hir servants by unwrithing her, performed, she being
more than halfe dead and voyd of any sense.  And that afterward,
contrary to her intent, she lived, it was very honourable and as
befitted her vertue, shewing by the pale hew and wanne colour of her
face how much of her life she had wasted by her incisions.  Loe heere
three true stories, which in my conceit are as pleasant and as
tragicall as any we devise at our pleasures to please the vulgar sort
withall; and I wonder that those who invent so many fabulous tales do
not rather make choise of infinite, excellent and quaint stories that
are found in bookes, wherein they should have lesse trouble to write
them, and might doubtlesse proove more pleasing to the hearer and
profitable to the reader.  And whosoever would undertake to frame a
compleate and well-joynted, bodie of them neede neither employe nor
adde any thing of his owne unto it except the ligaments, as the
soldring of another mettall, and by this meanes might compact sundry
events of all kindes, disposing and diversifying them according as the
beauty and lustre of the worke should require; and very neere, as Ovid
hath showen and contrived his Metamorphosis, with that strange number
of diverse fables.  In the last couple this is also worthy
consideration, that Paulina offreth willingly to leave her life for
her husband's sake, and that her husband had also other times quit
death for the love of her.  There is no great counterpoyze in this
exchange for us, but according to his Stoike humour I suppose he
perswaded himselfe to have done as much for hir, prolonging his life
for her availe as if he had died for hir.  In one of his letters he
writeth to Lucilius, after he had given him to understand how an ague
having surprised him in Rome, contrary to his wives opinion who would
needs have stayed him, he sodainly tooke his coach to goe unto a house
of his into the country; and how he told her that the ague he had was
no bodily fever, but of the place; and followeth thus: 'At last she
let me goe, earnestly recommending my health unto me.  Now I who know
how her life lodgeth in mine, begin to provide for myself, that
consequently I may provide for her the priviledge my age hath bestowed
on me making me more constant and more resolute in many things, I lose
it whenever I call to minde that in this aged corps there harboureth a
young woman to whom I bring some profit.  Since I cannot induce her to
love me more courageously, shee induceth me to love my selfe more
carefully; for something must be lent to honest affections, and
sometimes, although occasions urge us to the contrary, life must be
revoked againe, yea with torment.  The soule must be held fast with
ones teeth, since the lawe to live an honest man is not to live as
long as they please, but so long as they ought.  He who esteemeth not
his wife or a friend so much as that he will not lengthen his life for
them, and wil obstinately die, that man is over-nice and too
effeminate: The soule must commaund that unto her selfe, when the
utilitie of our friends requireth it we must sometimes lend our selves
unto our friend, and when we would die for us we ought for their sakes
to interrupt our deseigne.  It is a testimony of high courage to
returne to life for the respect of others, as divers notable men have
done; and to preserve age is a part of singular integritie (the
cheifest commoditie whereof is the carelesnesse of her continuance,
and a more courageous and disdainefull use of life) if a man perceive
such an office to be pleasing, acceptable and profitable to any
well-affected friend.  And who doeth it receiveth thereby a grateful
meede and pleasing recompence; for what can be sweeter than to be so
deare unto his wife, that in respect of her a man become more deare
unto himselfe.  So my Paulina hath not onely charged me with her
feare, but also with mine.  It hath not beene sufficient for me to
consider how resolutely I might die, but I have also considered how
irresolutely she might endure it, I have enforced my selfe to live.
And to live is sometime magnanimitie.  Reade heere his owne wordes, as
excellent as is his use.

CHAPTER 2.XXXVI+ OF THE WORTHIEST AND MOST EXCELLENT MEN



IF a man should demaund of mee, which of all men that ever came to my
knowledge I would make choice of, me seemeth I finde three who have
beene excellent above all others.  The one is Homer: not that
Aristotle+ or Varro+ (for example sake) were not peradventure as wise
and as sufficient as he: nor that Virgil (and possibly in his owne
arte) be not comparable unto him.  I leave that to their judgements
that know them both.  I who know but one of then, according to my
skill may onely say this, that I cannot be persuaded the Muses
themselves did ever go beyond the Roman.


  Tale facit carmen docta testudine, quale

  Cynthius impositis temperat articulis,/1

  He on his learned lute such verse doth play

  As Phoebus should thereto his fingers lay.

In which judgement this must notwitlistdnding not be forgotten, that
Virgil doth especially derive his sufficiency from Homer, and he is
his guide and schoolemaster, and that but only glance or sentence of
the Iliads hath given both body and matter to that great and divine
poem of the AEneid.  My meaning is not to account so: I entermix
divers other circumstances which yeeld this man most admirable unto
me, and as it were beyond humane condition.  And truely I am often
amazed that he who hath produced, and by his authority brought so many
deities in credit with the world, hath'not obtained to be reputed a
god himselfe.  Being blind and indigent, having lived before ever the

----- 1 PROPERT. 1. ii.  Eleg. xxxiv. 79.

sciences were redacted into strict rules and certaine observations, he
had so perfect knowledge of them, that all those which since his time
have labored to establish pollicies or commonwealths, to manage
warres, and to write either of religion or philosophy, in which sect
soever or of all artes, have made use of him as of an absolutely
perfect master in the knowledge of all things; and of his books, as of
a seminary, a spring-garden or store-house of all kinds of sufficiency
and learning.

  Qui quid sit pulchchrum, quid turpe, quid utile, quid non, Plenius
  ac melius, Chrysippo, ac Crantore dicit./1

  What is faire, what is foule, what profit may, what not, Better than
  Crantor or Chrysippus, Homer wrot.

  And as another saith:


  -----a quo ceu fonte perrenni

  Vatum Pieriis labra rigantur aquis./2


  By whom, as by an ever-flowing-filling spring,

  With Muses liquor poets lippes are bath'de to sing.

  And another

  Adde Heliconiadum comites, quoram unus Homerus,

  Astra potitus/3

  Muses companions adde to these, of all

  One onely Homer hath in heav'n his stall.

  And another


  ----- cujusque ex ore profuso

  Omnis posteritas latices in carmina duxit,

  Amnemque in tenues, ausa est deducere rivos:

  Unius faacunda bonis./4

  From whose large mouth for verse all that since live

  Drew water, and grew bolder to derive

  Into thinne shallow rivers his deepe flood

  Richly luxuriant in one man's good.


----- 1 HOR. 1. i.  Epist. xxiii. 2 OVID.  Am. 1. iii.
Eleg. viii. 25. 3 LUCR. 1. iii. 1081. 4 MANIL.  Ast. 1. ii. 8.

It is against nature's course that he bath made the most excelent
production that may be: for the ordinary birth of things is imperfect:
they are augmented by encrease and corroborated by growth.  He hath
reduced the infancy of poesie and divers other sciences to be ripe,
perfect, and compleate.  By which reason he may be termed the first
and last of poets, following the noble testimony antiquity hath left
us of him, that having had no man before him whom he might imitate, so
bath hee had none after him could imitate him.  His wordes (according
to Aristotle) are the onely words that have motion and action: they
are the onely substantiall wordes.  Alexander the Great, having
lighted upon a rich casket amongst Darius his spoils, appoynted the
same to be safely kept for himselfe to keepe his Homer in, saying he
was the best adviser and faithfullest counselor he had in his military
affaires.  By the same reason said Cliomenes, sonne to Anaxandridas,
that hee was the Lacedemonians poet, for he was an excellent good
teacher or master of warrelike discipline.  This singular praise and
particular commendation hath also been given him by Plutarke, where he
saith that he is the only author in the world who yet never distasted
reader, or glutted man, ever showing himself other and different to
the readers, and ever flourishing with a new grace.  That wagge
Alcibiades, demanding one of Homers bookes of one who professed
letters, because he had it not, gave him a whirrit on the eare, as if
a man should finde one of our Priests without a breviarie. Xenophanes
one day made his moane to Hieron, the tyrant of Siracusa, that he was
so poore as he had not wherewithall to finde two servants.  How
commeth that to passe? (answered Hieron).  Homer, who was much poorer
than thou art, dead as he is, findeth more than tenne thousand.  What
left Panaetius unsaide when he named Plato the Homer of Philosophers?
Besides, what glory may be compared to his?  There is nothing liveth
so in mens mouthes as his name and his workes; nothing so knowne and
received as Troy, as Helen and her warres, which peradventure never
were.  Our children are yet called by the names he invented three
thousand years since and more.  Who knoweth not Hector? Who hath not
heard of Achilles?  Not onely some particular races, but most nations,
seeke to derive themselves from his inventions.  Machomet, the second
of that name, Emperour of Turkes, writing to Pope Pius the second: I
wonder (saith he) how the Italians will bandie against me, seeing we
have our common offspring, from the Troians; and I as well as they
have an interest to re venge the blood of Hector upon the Graecians
whom they favour against me.  Is it not a worthy comedie, whereof
kings, commonwealths, principalities, and emperours have for many ages
together played their parts, and to which this great universe serveth
as a theatre?  Seven cities of Greece strived amongst themselves about
the places of his birth, so much honour his very obscuritie procured
him.

  Smyrna, Rhodos, Colophon, Salamis, Chios, Argos, Athenae./1

  Rhodes, Salamis, Colophon, Chios, Argos, Smyrna, with Athens.

The other is Alexander the Great.  For who shall consider his age,
wherein hee beganne his enterprises; the small meanes he had to ground
so glorious a desseigne upon, the authoritie he attained unto in his
infancie amongst the greatest commanders and most experienced
captaines in the world, by whom he was followed: the extraordinary
favour wherwith fortune embraced him and seconded so many of his
haughty-dangerous exploites, which I may in a manner call rash or
fond-hardie.

  Impellens quicquid sibi summa petenti

  Obstaret, gaudensque viam fecisse ruinae./2

  While he shot at the high'st, all that

  He for'st and joyde with ruine to make way.

  That eminent greatnesse to have at the age of


----- 1 A.  GEL.  Noct.  Att. 1. iii. c. 11. 2 LUCAN 1. i. 148

thirtie yeares, passed victoriously through all the habitable earth
and but with half the life of a man to {usthem+} have attained the
utmost endeavour of human nature so that you cannot imagine his
continuance lawfull, and the lasting of his increase in fortune, and
progres in vertue even unto a just terme of age, but you must suppose
something above man to have caused so many royal branches to issue
from out the loines of his souldiers, leaving the world after his
death to be shared between foure successors, onely captaines of his
armie, whose successors have so long time since continued, and
descendants maintained that large possession.  So infinite, rare, and
excellent vertues that were in him, as justice, temperance,
liberalitie, integritie in words, love toward his, and humanitie
toward the conquered.{Alexander+} For in truth his maners seeme to
admit he no just cause of reproach: indeed some of his particular,
rare, and extraordinary actions may in some sort be taxed.  For it is
impossible to conduct so great and direct so violent motion with the
strict rules of justice.  Such men ought to be judged in gross by the
mistris end of their actions.  The ruine of Thebes; the murder of
Menander, and of Ephestions Physitian; the massacre of so many Persian
prisoners at once; of a troupe of Indian souldiers, not without some
prejudice unto his word and promise; and of the Cosaeians and their
little children, are escapes somewhat hard to be excused.  For
concerning Clitus+, the fault was expiated beyond its merit; and that
action, as much as any other, witnesseth the integritie and
cheerfulness of his complexion, and that it was a complexion in it
selfe exceedingly formed to goodnesse.  And it was wittily said of one
that he had vertues by nature and vices by accident.  Concerning the
point that he was somewhat too lavish a boaster+, and over- impatient
to heare himselfe ill spoken of; and touching those mangers, armes and
bits, which he caused to be scattered in India, respecting his age and
the prosperitie of his fortune, they are in my conceit pardonable in
him.  He that shall also consider his many vertues, as diligence,
foresight, patience, discipline, policie, magnanimitie, resolution and
good fortune, {list_of_virtues+} wherein though Haniballs authority
had not taught it us, he hath beene the first and chiefe of men: the
rare beauties, matchlesse features, and incomparable conditions of his
person, beyond all comparison and wonder breeding; his carriage,
demeanor, and venerable behaviour, in a face so young, so vermeill,
and heart enflaming:

  Oualis ubi Occam perfusus Lucifer unda,

  Quem Venus ante alios astrorum diligit ignes,

  Extulit os sacrum caelo, tenebrasque resolvit./1

  As when the day-starre washt in ocean streames,

  Which Venus most of all the starres esteemes,

  Showes sacred light, shakes darkenesse off with beames.

The excellencie of his wit, knowledge and capacity; the continuance
and greatnesse of his glory unspotted, untainted, pure and free from
all blame or envie: insomuch as long after his death it was
religiously beleeved of many that the medalls or breeches representing
his person brought good lucke unto such as wore or had them about
them. And that more Kings and Princes have written his gests and
actions then any other historians of what a quality soever, have
registered the gests or collected the actions of any other King or
Prince that ever was: and that even at this day the Mahometists, who
contemne all other histories, by special priviledge allow, receive,
and onely honour his.  All which premises duely considered together,
hee shall confesses I have had good reason to preferre him before
Caesar himselfe, who alone might have made me doubt of my choice.  And
it must needes bee granted that in his exploites there was more of his
owne, but more of fortunes in Alexander's achievements. They have both
had many things mutually alike, and Caesar happily some greater.  They
were two quicke and devouring fires, or two swift and surrounding
streames, able to ravage the world by sundry wayes.

----- 1 VIRG.  AEn. 1. viii. 589.

  Et velut immissi diversis partibus ignes

  Arentem in silvam, et virgulta sonantia lauro:

  Aut ubi decursu rapido de montibus altis

  Dant sonitum spumosi amnes, et in aequora currunt,

  Quisque suum populatus iter./1

  As when on divers sides fire is applied

  To cracking bay-shrubs, or to woods sunne dried

  Or as when flaming streames from mountaines hie,

  With downe-fall swift resound, and to sea flie

  Each one doth havocke-out his way thereby.

But grant Caesar's ambition were more moderate, it is so unhappy in
that it met, with this vile subject of the subversion of his countrie,
{Brutus+} and universall empairing of the world; that all parts
impartially collected and put together in the balance, I must
necessarily bend to Alexander's side.  The third, and in my judgement
most excellent man, is Epaminondas+. Of glorie he hath not so much as
some, and is farre shorte of diverse (which well considered is no
substantiall part of the thing) in resolution and true valour, not of
that which is set on by ambition, but of that which wisedome and
reason may settle in a well-disposed minde, hee had as much as maybe
imagined or wished for. He hath in mine opinion made as great triall
of his vertues as ever did Alexander or Caesar, for although his
exploites of warre be not so frequent and so high raised, yet being
throughly considered, they are as weightie, as resolute, as constant,
yea and as authenticall a testimony of hardnes and military
sufficiencie as any man's else.  The Greacians, without any
contradiction, affoorded him the honour to entitle him the chiefe and
first man among themselves: and to be the first and chiefe man of
Greece is without all question to bee chiefe and first man of the
world.  Touching his knowledge and worth, this ancient judgement doth
yet remaine amongst us, that never was man who knew so much, nor never
man that spake lesse than he. {PlainDealer+} For he was by sect a
Pythagorean, and what he spake no man ever spake better. An excellent
and most perswasive orator was hee.  And 1 VIRG.  AEn. 1. xii. 521.
concerning his maners and conscience therein be farre ontwent all that
ever medled with managing affaires: for in this one part, which ought
especially to be noted, and which alone declareth that we are, and
which only I counterpoise to al others together, he giveth place to no
philosopher; no not to Socrates himselfe.  In him innocencie+ is a
qualities proper, chiefe, constant, uniforme, and incorruptible; in
comparison of which, it seemeth in Alexander subalternall, uncertaine,
variable, effeminate and accidentall.  Antiquitie judged that
precisely to sift out, and curiously to prie into all other famous
captaines, there is in every one severally some speciall quality which
makes him renowned and famous.  In this man alone it is a vertue and
sufficiencie, every where compleate and alike, which in all offices of
humane life leaveth nothing more to be wished for.  Be it in publike
or private, in peaceable negociations or warlike occupations, be it to
live or die, greatly or gloriously, I know no forme or fortune of man
that I admire or regard with so much honour, with so much love.  True
it is, I finde this obstinacie in povertie somewhat scrupulous, and so
have his best friends pourtrayed it.  And this onely action (high
notwithstanding and very worthy admiration) I finde or deeme somewhat
sharpen so as I would not wish nor desire the imitation thereof in me,
according to the forme it was in him.  Scipio AEmilianus alone (wold
any charge him with as fierie and nobly-minded an end, and with as
deepe and universall knowledge of sciences) might be placed in the
other scale of the ballance against him.  Oh what a displeasure hath
swift-gliding Time done me, even in the nick, to deprive our eyes of
the chiefest paire of lives, directly the noblest that ever were in
Plutarke, of these two truly worthy personages: by the universall
consent of the world, the one chiefe of Graecians, the other
principall of Romanes.  What a matter, what a workeman!  For a man
that was no saint, but as we say a gallant-honest man, of civil maners
and common customes, of a temperate haughtinesse, the richest life I
know (as the vulgar saying is) to have lived amongst the living, and
fraughted with the richest qualities and most to be desired parts (all
things impartially considered) in my humour, is that of
Alcibiades+. But touching Epaminondas, for a patterne of excessive
goodness I will here insert certaine of his opinions.  The sweetest
contentment he had in all his life he witnesseth to have beene the
pleasure he gave his father and mother of his victory upon Leuctra: he
staketh much in preferring their pleasure before his content, so just
and full of so glorious an action.  Hee thought it unlawfull, yea were
it to recover the libertie of his countrey, for any one to kill a man
except he knew a just cause.  And therefore was he so backeward in the
enterprise of Pelopidas his companion, for the deliverance of Thebes.
He was also of opinion that in a battell a man should avoid to
encounter his friend, being on the contrary part, and if he met him to
spare him.  And his humanitie or gentleness even towards his very
enemies, having made him to be suspected of the Boeotians, forsomuch
as after he had miraculously forced the Lacedemonians to open him a
passage, which at the entrance of Morea, neere Corinth, they had
undertaken to make good, he was contented, without further pursuing
them in furie, to have marched over their bellies, was the cause he
was deposed of his office of Captaine Generall.  Most honourable for
such a cause, and for the shame it was to them, soone after to be
forced by necessitie to advance him to his first place, and to
acknowledge how their glorie, and confesse that their safetie, did
onely depend on him: victory following him as his shadow whither
soever he went, and as the prosperitie of his countrie was borne by
and with him, so it died with and by him.

CHAPTER 2.XXXVII+ OF THE RESEMBLANCE BETWEENE CHILDREN AND FATHERS


THIS hudling up of so much trash, or packing of so many severall
pieces, is done so strangely, as I never lay hands on it but when an
over lazie idlenesse urgeth me, and nowhere but in mine owne house.
So has it beene compact at sundry pauses, and contrived at severall
intervalls, as occasions have sometime for many months together, here
and there in other places detained me.  Besides, I never correct my
first imaginations by the second, it may happen I now and then alter
some word rather to diversifie then take any thing away.  My purpose
is to represent the progress of my humours, that every part be seen or
member distinguished as it was produced.  I would to God I had begunne
sooner, and knew the tracks of my changes and course of my variations.
A boy whom I employed to write for me supposed he had gotten a rich
bootie when he stole some parts which he best liked; but one thing
comforts me, that he shall gaine no more than I lost by them. I am
growne elder by seven or eight yeares since I beganne them; nor hath
it beene with-out some new purchase.  I have by the liberality of
years acquainted my selfe with the stone-chollike.  Their commerce and
long conversation is not easily past over without some such-like
fruite.  I would be glad that of many other presents they have ever in
store, to bestow upon such as waite upon them long, they had made
choice of some one that had beene more acceptable unto me: for they
could never possess me with any that, even from my infancy, I hated
more.  Of all accidents incident to age it was that I feared most.  My
selfe have many times thought I went on too farre, and that to hold
out so long a journey, I must of necessitie in the end stumble upon
some such unpleasing chance.  I perceived plainly and protested
sufficiently it was high time to depart, and that according to the
rule of skilfull chirurgions, who when they must cut off some members
life must be seared to the quicke and cut to the sound flesh.  That
nature is wont to make him pay untolerable usurie who doth not yeeld
or pay the same in due time.  I was so farre from being readie to make
lawfull tender of it, that in eighteene months, or thereabouts, I have
continued in so yrkesome and unpleasing plight, I have already learn'd
to apply my selfe unto it; and am now entring into covenant with this
chollicall kinde of life; for therein I finde matter wherewith to
comfort me, and to hope better.  So much are men enured in their
miserable estate, that no condition is so poore but they will accept:
so they may continue in the same.  Heare Maecenas -

  Debilem facito manu,

  Debilem pede, coxa.

  Lubricos quate dentes,

  Vita dum superego, bene est./1

  Make me be weake of hand,

  Scarce on my legges to stand,

  Shake my loose teeth with paine,

  'Tis well so life remaine.

And Tamburlane cloked the fantasticall cruelty he exercised upon
lazars or leprousmen with a foolish kinde of humanitie, putting all he
could finde or heare of to death, (as he said) to ridde them from so
painefull and miserable a life as they lived.  For there was none so
wretched amongst them that would not rather have beene three times a
leper than not to be at all.  And Antisthenes the Stoick being very
sicke, and crying out, 'Oh, who shall deliver me from my tormenting
evils?

----- 1 SEN.  Epist. ci.

Diogenes, who was come to visite him, foorthwith presenting him a
knife: 'Mary, this,' said he, 'and that very speedily, if thou
please': 'I mean not of my life,' replied be, 'but of my sickness.
The sufferances which simply touch us in minde doe much lesse afflict
me then most men: partly by judgement; for the world deemeth diverse
things horible, or avoydable with the losse of life, to me are in a
manner indifferent: partly by a stupid and insensible complexion, I
have in accidents that hit me not point-blancke: which complexion I
esteeme one of the better partes of my naturall condition. But the
truely- essentiall and corporall sufferances, those I taste very
sensibly: yet is it, having other times fore-apprehended them with a
delicate and weake sight, and by the enjoying of this long health and
happy rest, which God hath lent me the better part of my age, somewhat
impaired; I had by imagination conceived them so intolerable that, in
good truth, I was more afraide than since I have found hurt in them:
whereupon I dayly augment this opinion: that most of our soules
faculties (as we employ them) doe more trouble than stead the quiet
repose of life.  I am continually grapling with the worst of all
diseases, the most grievous, the most mortall, the most remedilesse
and the most violent.  I have alreadie had triall of five or six long
and painefull fittes of it.  Neverthelesse, eyther I flatter-my selfe,
or in this plight there is yet something that would faine keep life
and soule together, namely, in him whose minde is free from feare of
death, and from the threats, conclusions and consequences which
physicke is ever buzzing into our heads.  But the effect of paine it
selfe hath not so sharpe a smarting, or so pricking a sharpenesse,
that a setled man should enter into rage or fall into despaire.  This
commoditie at least I have by the chollicke, that what I could never
bring to passe in my selfe, which was altogether to reconcile and
thoroughly to acquaint my selfe with death+, shee shall atchieve, she
shall accomplish, for by how much more shee shall importune and urge
me, by so much lesse shall death bee fearefull unto mee.  I had
already gotten, not to be beholding to life, but onely in regard of
life, and for lives sake: she shall also untie this intelligence and
loose this combination.  And God graunt, if in the end her sharpenesse
shall happen to surmount my strength, shee cast me not into other
extremities no lesse vicious, no lesse bad, that is, to love and
desire to die.  Summum nec metuas diem, nec optes./1

  Nor feare thy latest doome,

  Nor wish it ere it come.

They are two passioxn to be feared, but one hath her remedy neerer
than the other.  Otherwise I have ever, found that precept ceremonious
which so precisely appoints a man to set a good countenance, a setled
resolution, and disdainefulf carriage, upon the sufferance of evills.
Why doth Philosophy, which onely respecteth livelinesse and regardeth
effects, ammuze it selfe about these externall apparances?  Let her
leave this care to mimikes, to histrions, and to rhetoricke masters,
who make so great accompt of our gestures.  Let her hardly remit this
vocall lithernesse unto evill, if it be neither cordiall nor
stomacall.  And let her lend her voluntary plaints to the kinde of
sighes, sobs, palpitations, and palenesse which nature hath exempted
from our puissance.  Alwayes provided, the courage be without feare,
and words sans dispaire: let her be so contented. 'What matter is it
if wee bend our armes, so we writhe not our thoughts?  She frame thus
for ourselves, not for others: to be, not to seeme. {PlainDealer+} Let
her applie her selfe to governe our understanding, which she hath
undertaken to instruct.  Let her in the pangs or fits of the chollike,
still maintains the soule capable to acknowledge her selfe and follow
her accustomed course, resisting sorrow and enduring griefe, and not
shamefully to prostrate her selfe at his feet: mooved and chafed with
the combate, not basely suppressed nor faintly overthrowne: capable of

----- 1 MART. 1. x.  Epig. xlvii. ult.

entertainement and other occupations unto a certaine limit.  In so
extreme accidents it is cruelty to require so composed a warde at our
hands.  If we have a good game it skills not, though we have an ill
countenance.  If the body be any whit eased by complaining, let him
doe it: if stirring or agitation please him, let him turne, rowle, and
tosse himselfe as long as he list: if with raising his voyce, or
sending it forth with more violence, he think his griefe any thing
alayed or vented (as some physitians affirme it somewhat easeth women
great with childe, and is a meane of easie or speedy delivery) feare
he not to do it; or if he may but entertaine his torment, let him
mainly cry out.  Let us not commaund our voyce to depart; but if she
will, let us not hinder it, Epicurus doth not only pardon his wise-man
to crie out, when he is grieved or vexed, but perswadeth him to it.
Pugiles etiam quum feriunt, in jactandis caestibus ingemiscunt, quia
profundenda voce omne corpus intenditur venitque plaga vehementior:/1
'Men when they fight with sand-bags, or such heavy weapons, in
fetching their blow and driving it, will give a groane withall because
by stretching their voyce all their body is also strayned, and the
stroke cometh with more vehemence.' We are vexed and troubled enough
with the evill, without troubling and vexing our selves with these
superfluous rules.  This I say to excuse those which are ordinarily
seene to rage in the fits, and storme in the assaults of this
sicknesse, for, as for me, I have hitherto past it over with somewhat
a better countenance, and am content to groane without braying and
exclaiming.  And yet I trouble not myselfe to maintaine this exterior
decencie; for I make small reckoning of such an advantage, in that I
lend my sicknesse what it requireth: but either my paine is not so
excessive, or I beare it with more constancy than the vulgar sorte.
Indeede I must confesse, when the sharpe fits or throwes assaile me, I
complaine and vexe my selfe, but yet I never fall into despaire, as
that fellow:

----- 1 CIC.  Tusc.  Qu. 1. ii.

  Eiulatu, questu, gemitu, fremitibus

  Resonando multum flebiles voces refert./1

  With howling, growning and complaint of fates,

  Most lamentable cries he imitates.

I feele my selfe in the greatest heate of my sicknesse and I ever
found my selfe capable and in tune, to speake, to thinke, and to
answer, as soundly as at any other time, but not so constantly,
because my paine doth much trouble and distract me.  When I am thought
to bee at the lowest, and that such as are about me spare me, I often
make a triall of my forces, and propose them such discourses as are
furthest from my state.  There is nothing impossible for mee; and me
thinkes I can doe all things upon a sodaine fitte, so it continue not
long.  Oh, why have not I the gift of that dreamer mentioned by
Cicero, who dreaming that hee was closely embracing a yong wench,
found himselfe ridde of the stone in his sheetes!  Mine doe strangely
dis-wench me.  In the intermission or respites of this outragious
paine, when as my ureters (through which the urine passeth from the
reines to the bladder) languish without gnawing me, I sodainely
returne into my ordinary forme; forsomuch as my mind taketh no other
allarume but the sensible and corporall.  All which I certainely owe
unto the care I have had to prepare my selfe by reason and discourse
of such accidents:

  ----- laborum

  Nulla mihi nova nunc facies inopinaque surgit,


  Omnia praecepi, atque animo mecum ante peregi./2

  No new or unexpected forme is cast,

  Of tratvels in my breast: all I forecast,

  In my minde with my selfe I all forepast.

I am handled somewhat roughly for a prentise, and with a violent and
rude change; being at one instant falne from a very pleasing, calme,
and most happy condition of life, unto the most dolorous, yrkesome,
and painefull that can possibly be imagined: for, besides

----- 1 CIC.  Tusc.  Qu. 1. ii. 2 VIRG.  AEn. 1. vi. 103.

that in it selfe it is a disease greatly to be feared, its beginnings
or approaches are in mee sharper or more difficult than it is wont to
trouble others withall.  The pangs and fittes thereof doe so often
assaile mee, that in a manner I have no more feeling of perfect
health.  Notwithstanding I hitherto keepe my spirit so seated as, if I
can but joyne constancy unto it, I finde my selfe to be in a much
better state of life than a thousand others, who have neither ague nor
other infirmitie but such as for want of discourse they give
themselves.  There is a certaine fashion of subtile humilitie which
procedeth of presumption: as this, that in many things we acknowledge
our ignorance, and are so curteous to avowe that in Natures workes
there are some qualities and conditions which to us are imperceptible,
and whereof our sufficiencie cannot discover the meanes nor finde out
the causes.  By this honest and conscientious declaration, we hope to
gaine that we shall also be beleeved in those we shall say to
understand.  Wee neede not goe to cull out miracles, and chuse strange
difficulties: mee seemeth, that amongst those things we ordinarily see
there are such incomprehensible rarities as they exceed all difficulty
of miracles.  What monster is it that this teare or drop of seed
whereof we are ingendred brings with it, and in it the impressions,
not only of the corporall forme, but even of the very thoughts and
inclinations of our fathers?  Where doth this droppe of water contains
or lodge this infinite number of formes?  And how bear they these
resemblances of so rash and unruly a progresse, that the childes
childe shall be answerable to his grandfather, and the nephew to his
uncle? In the family of the Lepidus the Roman, there have beene three,
not successively, but some between, that were borne with one same eye
covered with a cartilage or gristle.  There was a race in Thebes which
from their mothers wombe bare the forme of a burre, or yron of a
launce; and such as had it not were judged as misbegotten and deemed
unlawful].  Aristotle reporteth of a certaine nation, with whom all
women were common, where children were allotted their fathers only by
their resemblances. It may be supposed that I am indebted to my father
for this stonie-quality, for he died exceedingly tormented with a
great stone in his bladder.  He never felt himself troubled with the
disease but at the age of sixtie- seaven yeares, before which time he
had never felt any likelihood or motion of it, nor in his reines, nor
in his sides, nor elsewhere: and untill then had lived in very
prosperous health, and little subject to infirmities, and continued
seven yeares and more with that disease training a very dolorous
lives-end.  I was borne five and twenty yeares before his sickness and
during the course of his healthy state, his third child.  Where was al
this while the propension or inclination to this defect hatched?  And
when he was so farre from such a disease, that light part of his
substance wherewith he composed me, how could it for her part beare so
great an impression of it?  And how so closely covered, that
fortie-five yeares after, {usthem+} I have begunne to have a feeling
of it? and hitherto alone, among so many brethren and sisters, and all
of one mother.  He that shal resolve me of this progresse I will
believe him as many other miracles as he shall please to tell mee:
alwayes provided (as commonly they doe) hee goe not about to pay me
with a doctrine much more difficult and fantastical then the thing it
selfe (let physitians somewhat excuse my libertie): for by the same
infusion and fatall insinuation, I have received the hate and contempt
of their doctrine.  The antipathie which is betweene me and their arte
is to me hereditarie.  My father lived three score and fourteene
yeares; my grandfather three score and nine; my great grandfather very
neere fourescore, and never tasted or tooke any kinde of
physicke. {usthem+} And whatsoever was not in ordinary use amongst
them was deemed a drug.  Physicke is grounded upon experience and
examples.  So is mine opinion.  Is not this a manifest kinde of
experience, and very advantageous?  I know not whether in all their
registers they are able to finde me three more, borne, bred, brought
up, and deceased, under one roofe, in one same chimnie, that by their
owne direction and regiment have lived so long.  Wherein they must
needes grant me, that if it be not reason, at least it is fortune that
is on my side.  Whereas among physitians fortune is of more
consequence then reason.  Low-brought and weake as I am now, let them
not take me at an advantage, nor let them not threaten me: for that
were insulting arrogance.  And to say truth, I have by my familiar
examples gained enough upon them, although they take hold and stay
there.  Humane things have not so much constancie: it is now two
hundred yeares, wanting but eighteene, that this essay continueth with
us: for the first was borne in the yeare of our Lord one thousand
foure hundred and two, some reason there is why this experience should
now beginne to faile us.  Let them not upbraide me with those
infirmities which now have seized upon me: is it not sufficient to
have lived seven and fortie yeares in good and perfect health for my
part?  Suppose it to be the end of my carriere, yet it is of the
longest. {usthem+} Mine ancestors by some secret instinct and naturall
inclination have ever loathed al maner of physicke: for the very sight
of drugs bred a kinde of horror in my father. The Lord of Gaviac, mine
unckle by the fathers side, a man of the church, sickish even from his
birth, and who notwithstanding made his weake life to hold untill
sixtie seaven yeares, falling once into a dangerous and vehement
continuall feaver, it was by the physitians concluded that unlesse he
would aide himselfe (for they ofte terme that aide which indeede is
impeachment) he was but a dead man.  The good soule, afrighted as he
was at that horrible sentence, answred thus, why then I am a dead man:
but shortly after God made their prognostications to proove vaine.
The Lord of Bussaguet, last of the brethren (for they were foure), and
by much the last, he alone submitted himselfe to that arte, as I
imagine by reason of the frequence he had in other sciences; for he
was a counsellor in the Court of Parliament, which prospered so ill
with him that though he were in shew of a very strong complexion, he
died long before the others, except one, the Lord of Saint Michael.
It may well be I have received of them that natural dyspathie to
physicke.  Yet if there had been no other consideration but this, I
would have endevoured to force it.  For all these conditions, which
without reason are borne in us, are vicious.  It is a kinde of maladie
a man must fight withall.  It may be I had such a propension, but I
have settled and strengthened the same by discourses which in me have
confirmed the opinion I have of it.  For I have also the consideration
to refuse physicke by reason of the sharpnesse of its taste.  It would
not easily agree with my humour, who thinke health worthy to be
purchased with the price of all cauteries and incisions, how painefull
soever.  And following Epicurus, mee seemeth that all maner of
voluptuousnesse should be avoided, if greater griefes follow them, and
griefes to be sought after, that have greater voluptuousnesse ensuing
them.  Health is a very precious jewell, and the onely thing that in
pursuite of it deserveth a man should not onely employ time, labour,
sweate and goods, but also life to get it; forasmuch as without it
life becommeth injurious unto us.  Voluptuousnes, science and vertue,
without it, tarnish and vanish away.  And to the most constant and
exact discourses that philosophy will imprint in our minds to the
contrary, wee neede not oppose any thing against it but the image of
Plato, being visited with the falling sickenesse, or an apoplexie; and
in this presupposition chalenge him to call the richest faculties of
his minde to helpe him.  All meanes that may bring us unto health,
cannot be esteemed of men either sharpe or deare.  But I have some
other apparances which strangely make me to distrust al his ware.  I
doe not say but there may be some art of it: it is certaine that
amongst so many of Natures workes there are some things proper for the
preservation of our health.  I know there are some simples which in
operation are moistening and some drying.  My selfe have found, by
experience, that radish rootes are windie, and senie-leeves breede
loosenes in the belly.  I have the knowledge of divers such
experiments, as I know that mutton nourisheth, that wine warmeth me.
And Solon was wont to say that I eating was, as all other drugges are,
a medicine against the disease of hunger.  I disallow not the use we
draw from the world, nor doubt I of natures power and fruitfulnesse,
and other application to our need.  I see that the pickrell-fish and
the swallowes live well by her lawes. I greatly distrust the
inventions of our wit, of our arte and of our science, in favour of
which we have forsaken nature, and abandoned her rules; wherein we can
neither observe limitation nor keepe moderation.  As we term justice,
the composition of the first lawes that came unto our hands, and their
practice and dispensation very often most wicked and inconvenient.
And as those which mocke and condemne it, intend not neverthelesse to
wrong this noble virtue; but onely to condemne the abuse and
profanation of so sacred a title: so likewise in physicke, I know her
glorious name, her proposition, and her promise, so profitable to
mankinde: but what it desseigneth amongst us, I neither honour nor
respect.  First, experience makes me fear it, for of all I know, I see
no kinde of men so seene sicke, nor so late cured, as those who are
under the jurisdiction of physicke: Their very health is distempered
and corrupted by the constraint of their prescriptions. Physitians are
not contented to have the government over sicknesses, but they make
health to be sicke, lest a man should at any time escape their
authority.  Of a constant and perfect health, doe they not frame an
argument of some future daungerous sickenesse?  I have often beene
sicke, and without any their helpe, I have found my sicknesses (though
I never medled with the bitterness of their prescriptions) as easie to
be tollerated and as short as any mans else, and yet I have felt
diverse.  My health is free and sound, without any rules or
discipline) except of my owne custome and pleasure.  I finde no
difference in places, al are alike to me to dwell in: for being sicke,
I neede no other commodities then those I must have when I am in
health.  I am nothing passionated, though I be without physitian,
without apothecary, or without physical helpe; whereat I see some as
much troubled in minde as they are with their disease.  What, doth the
best physitian of them all make us perceive any happinesse or
continuance in his life, as may witnesse some manifest effect of his
skill and learning?  There is no nation but hath continued many ages
without physicke: yea the first ages, which is as much to say, the
best and most happy: and the tenth part of the world hath as yet no
use of it.  Infinite nations know it not; where they live both more
healthie and much longer than we doe: yea and amongst us the common
sort live happily without it.  The Romanes had beene sixe hundred
yeares before ever they received it: by meanes of interposition of
Cato the censor, they banisht it their citie, who declared how easily
man might live without it, having lived himselfe foure score and five
yeeres, and his wife untill she was extreamely old, not without
physicke, but indeed without any physitian. For whatsoever is by
experience found healthy for our body and health may be termed
physicke, He entertained (as Plutarke saith) his familie in health by
the use (as farre as I remember) of hares milk: as the Arcadians
(saith Plinie) cure all maladies with cowes milke.  And the Lybians
(saith Herodotus) doe generally enjoy a perfect health by observing
this custome, which is, so soone as their children are about foure
yeeres old, to cautherize and seare the veines of their head and
temples, whereby they cut off the way to all rumes and defluxions.
And the countrie-people where I dwell use nothing against all diseases
but some of the strongest wine they can get, with store of saffron and
spice in it; and all with one like fortune.  And to say true, of all
this diversitie of rules and confusion of prescriptions, what other
end or effect workes it but to evacuate the belly? which a thousand
home-simples will doe as well.  And I know not whether it be as
profitable (as they say) and whether our nature require the residents
of her excrements, untill a certaine measure, as wine doth his lees
for his preservation.  You see often men very healthy, by some strange
accidents, to fall into violent vomites and fluxies, and voyd great
store of excrements, without any precedent need or succeeding
benefite: yea, with some empairing and prejudice.  I learnt of Plato
not long since, that of three motions which belong to us, the last and
worst is that of purgations, and that no man, except he be a foole,
ought to undertake it, unlesse it be in great extremity.  The evill is
troubled and stirred up by contrary oppositions. It is the forme of
life that gently must diminish, consume and bring it to an end.  Since
the violent twinges of the drug and maladie are ever to our losse,
since the quarrell is cleared in us, and the drug a trustlesse helpe;
by its own nature an enemie to our health, and but by trouble hath no
accesse in our state.  Let's give them leave to go on.  That order
which provideth for fleas and moles, doth also provide for men, who
have the same patience to suffer themselves to be governed that fleas
and moles have.  We may fairely cry Bo-bo-boe; it may well make us
hoarse, but will nothing advaunce it.  It is a proud and impetuous
order.  Our feare and our despaire, in liew of enviting help from it,
doth distaste and delay it out of our helpe: it oweth his course to
sickness as well as to health. To suffer itselfe to be corrupted in
favour of one, to the prejudice of the others rights, it will not doe
it, so should they fall into disorder. Let us goe on in the name of
God; let us follow.  That order leadeth on such as follow it: those
that follow it not, it haleth on, both with their rage and physicke
together.  Cause a purgation to be prepared for your braine; it will
be better emploied unto it then to your stomacke.  A Lacedemonian
being asked, what had made him live so long in health, answered, 'The
ignorance of physicke.  And Adrian the Emperour, as he was dying,
ceased not to crie out that the number of physitians had killed him. A
bad wrestler became a physitian. 'Courage,' said Diogenes to him,
'thou hast reason to doe so, for now shalt thou helpe to put them into
the ground who have heeretofore ayded to lay thee on it.  But
according to Nicocles, they have this happe, that the sunne doth
manifest their successe, and the earth doth cover their fault.  And
besides, they have a very advantageous fashion among themselves, to
make use of all manner of events; for whatsoever either Fortune or
Nature, or any other strange cause (whereof the number is infinite)
produceth in us or good or healthfull, it is the priviledge of
physicke to ascribe it unto herselfe.  All the fortunate successes
that come to the patient which is under their government, it is from
nature he hath them.  The occasions that have cured me, and which
heale a thousand others who never send or call for physitians to helpe
them, they usurpe them in their subjects.  And touching ill accidents,
either they utterly disavow them, in imputing the blame of them to the
patient, by some vaine reasons, whereof they never misse to finde a
great number; as he lay with his armes out of the bed, he hath heard
the noyse of a coach.

  -----rhedarum transitus arcto

  Vicorum inflexu./1


  Coaches could hardly passe,

  The lane so crooked was.

His window was left open all night: hee hath laine upon the left side,
or troubled his head with some heavie thought.  In some, a word, a
dreame, or a looke, is of them deemed a sufficient excuse to free
themselves from all imputation: or if they please, they will also make
use of this emparing, and thereby make up their businesse, and as a
meane which can never faile them, when by their applications the
disease is growne desperate, to pay us with the assurance that, if
their remedies had not beene, it would have beene much worse.  He whom
but from a cold they have

----- 1 JUV.  Sat. iii. 236.

brought to a quotidian ague, without them should have had a continuall
feaver.  They must needes thrive in their businesses since all ills
redownd to their profit.  Truely they have reason to require of the
pacient an application of favourable confidence in them: which must
necessarily be in good earnest and yeelding to apply it selfe unto
imaginations, over-hardly to be believed, Plato said very well and to
the purpose, that freely to lie belonged onely to physitians, since
our health dependeth on their vanitie and falsehood of promises.
AEsope, an author of exceeding rare excellence, and whose graces few
discover, is very pleasant in representing this kinde of tyrannicall
authority unto us, which they usurpe upon poore soules, weakned by
sickenes and overwhelmed through feare: for he reporteth how a sicke
man, being demaunded by his physitian what operation he felt by the
physicke he had given him: 'I have sweate much,' answered he. 'That is
good,' replied the physitian.  Another time he asked him againe how he
had done since: 'I have had a great cold and quivered much,' said
he. 'That is very well,' quoth the physitian againe.  The third time
he demaunded of him how he felt himselfe, he answered: 'I swell and
puffe up as it were with the dropsie. 'That's not amisse,' said the
physitian.  A familiar friend of his comming afterward to visite him,
and to know how hee did. 'Verily,' said be, 'my friend, I die with
being too too well.  There was a more equall law in Egypt by which for
the first three dayes the physitian tooke the patient in hand upon the
patients perill and fortune; but the three dayes expired, it was at
his owne.  For, what reason is there that AEsculapius their patrone
must have beene strucken with thunder, forsomuch as he recovered
Hippolitus from death to life?

  Yam pater omnipotens aliquem indignatus ab umbris,

  Mortalem infernis ad lumina surgere vitae,

  Ipse repertorem medicinae talis, et artis

  Fulmine Phoebigenam Stygias detrusit ad undas./1


----- 1 VIRG.  AEn. 1. vii. 770.

  Jove, scorning that from shades infernall dight,

  A mortall man should rise to lifes new light,

  Apolloes sonne to hell he thunder-threw,

  Who such an arte found out, such medivine knew,

and his followers must be absolved that send so many soules from life
to death!  A physitian boasted unto Nicocles that his arte was of
exceeding great authority.  It is true (quoth Nicocles) for it may
kill so many people without feare of punishment by law.  As for the
rest, had I beene of their counsell, I would surely have made my
discipline more sacred and mysterious. They had begunne very well, but
the end hath not answered the beginning. It was a good ground to have
made Gods and Daemons authors of their science, to have assumed a
peculiar language and writing to themselves.  Howbeit, philosophy
supposeth it to be folly to perswade a man to his profit by wayes not
understood: Ut si quis medicus imperet vt sumat. 'As if a physitian
should bid a man take

  Terrigenam, herbigradam, domiportam, sanguine cassam./1

  One, earth-borne, goe-by-grasse, house-bearing, slimie, blood-lesse.

It was a good rule in their arte, and which accompanieth all
fanaticall, vaine, and supernaturall artes, that the patients beliefe
must by good hope and assurance preoccupate their effect and
operation. Which rule they hold so farre forth, that the most ignorant
and bungling horse-leach is fitter for a man that hath confidence in
him, than the skilfullest and learnedst physitian.  The very choyce of
most of their drugges is somewhat mysterious and divine.  The left
foot of a tortoyze, the stale of a lizard; the dongue of an elephant,
the liver of a mole, blood drawne from under the right wing of a white
pigeon, and for us who are troubled with the stone-cholike (so
disdainfully abuse they our misery) some rattes pounded to small
powder, and such other foolish trash, which rather seeme to be

----- 1 CIC.  Div. 1. ii.

magike spells or charmes than effects of any solide science.  I omit
to speake of the odde number of their pilles, the destination of
certaine dayes and feastes of the yeare, the distinction of houres to
gather the simples of their ingredients, and the same rewbarbative and
severely-grave looke of theirs, and of their port and countenance,
which Plinie himselfe mocketh at.  But, as I was about to say they
have failed, forsomuch as they have not added this to their faire
beginning, to make their assemblies more religious, and their
consultations more secret.  No profane man should have access unto
them, no more than to the secret ceremonies of AEsculapius. By which
meanes it commeth to passe that their irresolution; the weaknesse of
their arguments, divinations and grounds; the sharpenesse of their
contestations, full of hatred, of jealousie and particular
considerations, being apparant to all men; a man must needes be starke
blinde if he who falleth into their hands see not himselfe greatly
endangered.  Who ever saw physitian use his fellowes receipt without
dimishing or adding somewhat unto it; whereby they greatly betraie
their arte and make us perceive they rather respect their reputation,
and consequently their profit, than the well-fare or interests oi
their patients.  He is the wisest amongst their doctors who hath long
since prescribed them that one alone should meddle to cure a sicke
man; for, if it prosper not with him, and he do no good, the reproach
will not be great to the arte of physicke through the fault of one man
alone; and on the other side, if it thrive well with him, the glorie
shall be the greater; whereas if they be many, on every hand will they
discredit their mysterie, because they oftner happen to doe ill than
well.  They should have been content with the perpetuall disagreeing
which is ever found in the opinions of the principall masters and
chiefe authors of their science, knowne but by such as are conversant
in bookes, without making apparent shew of the controversies, and
inconstancies of their judgement, which they foster and continue
amongst themselves.  Will wee have an example of the ancient debate of
physicke?  Herophilus placeth the originall cause of sickenesse in the
humours: Erasistratus, in the blood of the arteries: Asclepiades, in
the invisible atomes that passe into our pores Alcmeon, in the
abundance or defence of corporall forces: Diocles, in the inequality
of the bodies elements, and in the quality of the aire wee breathe:
Strabo, in the abundance, cruditie, and corruption of the nourishment
wee take: Hipocrates doth place it in the spirits.  There is a friend
of theirs, whom they know better than I, who to his purpose crieth out
that the most important science in use amongst us (as that which hath
charge of our health and preservation) is by il hap the most
uncertaine, the most confused, and most agitated with infinite
changes.  There is no great danger to mistake the height of the sunne,
or missereckon the fraction of some astronomical suppuration; but
herein, whereon our being and chiefe freehold doth wholly depend, it
is no wisedome to abandon ourselves to the mercy of the agitation of
so manifold contrary windes.  Before the Peloponnesian war there was
no great newes of this science.  Hipocrates brought it into credite.
Whatsoever he established, Chrisippus overthrew.  Afterward
Erasistratus, grande-childe to Aristotle, re-enverst what ever
Chrysippus had written of it.  After these, start up the Emperikes,
who concerning the managig of this arte, tooke a new course altogether
different from those ancient fathers.  And when their credit began to
growe stale, Herophilus brought another kind of physicke into use,
which Asclepiades, when his turne came, impugned, and in the end
subverted.  Then came the opinions of Themison to bee in great
authority, then those of Musa, and afterward those of Vectius Valens,
a famous physitian, by reason of the acquaintance he had with
Messalina. During the time of Nero, the soveraigntitie of physick fel
to the hands of Thessalus, who abolished and condemned whatsoever had
been held of it before his time.  This mans doctrine was afterward
wholly overthrowne by Crinas of Marseilles, who anew revived and
framed that all men should direct and rule medicinable operations to
the Ephemerides and motions of the starres, to eate, to drinke, to
sleepe at what houre it should please Luna and Mercurie.  His
authority was soone after supplanted by Charinus, a physitian of the
same towne of Marseilles, who not onely impugned ancient physicke, but
also the use of warme and publike bathes, which had beene accustomed
to many ages before. Hee caused men to bee bathed in cold water; yea,
were it in the deepe of winter he plunged and dived sicke men into the
running streame of rivers. Untill Plinies time no Romane had ever
dained to exercise the arte of physicke, but was ever used by
strangers and Graecians as at this daie it is used in France by
Latinizers.  For as a famous physitian saith, we doe not easily admit
and allow that physicke, which wee understand, nor those drugs we
gather our selves.  If those nations from whom wee have the wood
guiacum, the sarsapareille, and the wood esquine, have any physitian
amongst them, how much thinke we by the same commendation of the
strangenesse, rarenesse and dearth, they will rejoyce at our coleworts
and parsly?  For, who dareth contemne things sought and fetcht so
farre-off with the hazard of so long and dangerous a peregrination?
since these auncient mutations of physicke, there have beene infinite
others, that have continued unto our dayes, and most often entire and
universal mutations; as are those which Paracelsus, Fioravanti and
Argenterius have produced: for (as it is told me) they do not only
change a receipt, but also the whole contexture and policie of
physickes whole body, accusing such as hitherto have made profession
thereof, of ignorance and cosinage.  Now I leave to your imagination
in what plight the poore patient findeth himselfe.  If we could but he
assured, when they mistake themselves, their physicke would do us no
harme, although not profit us, it were a reasonable composition for a
man to hazard himselfe to get some good, so he endangered not himselfe
to lose by it.  AEsope reporteth this storie, that one who had sought
a Moore- slave, supposing his blacke hew had come unto him by some
strange accident, or ill usage of his former master, with great
diligence caused him to be medicined with divers bathes and sundry
potions; it fortuned the Moore did no whit mend or change his swarthy
complexion, but lost his former health.  How often commeth it to
passe, and how many times see we physitians charge one another with
their patients death.  I remember a popular sickenesse which some
yeares since greatly troubled the townes about mee, very mortall and
dangerous the rage whereof being overpast, which had carried away an
infinite number of persons; one of the most famous physitians in all
the country published a booke concerning that disease, wherein he
adviseth himselfe that they had done amisse to use phlebotomy, and
confesseth it had beene one of the principall causes of so great an
inconvenience.  Moreover, their authors hold that there is no kinde of
physicke, but bath some hurtfull part in it.  And if those that fit
our turne doe in some sort harm us, what must those doe which are
given us to no purpose, and out of season?  As for me, if nothing else
belonged thereunto, I deeme it a matter very dangerous, and of great
prejudice for him who loathes the taste or abborres the smell of a
potion, to swallow it at so unconvenient houres, and so much against
his heart.  And I thinke it much distempereth a sicke man, namely, in
a season he hath so much neede of rest.  Besides, consider but the
occasions on tvhich they ordinarily ground the cause of our
sickenesses; they are so light and delicate, as thence I argue that a
very small error in compounding of their drugges may occasion as much
detriment.  Now if the mistaking in a physitian be dangerous, it is
very ill for us ; for it is hard if he fall not often into it.  He
hath needs of many parts, divers considerations, and severall
circumstances to proportion his desseigne justly.  He ought to know
the sicke man's complexion, his temper, his humours, his inclinations,
and his imaginations.  He must be assured or external circumstances;
of the nature of the place; the condition of the aire; the quality of
the weather; the situation of the planets, and their influences.  In
sickenes, be ought to be acquainted with the causes, with the signes,
with the affections and criticall daies; in drugges, he should
understand their weight, their vertue, and their operation, the
country, the figure, the age, the dispensation.  In all these parts be
must know how to proportion and referre them one unto another, thereby
to beget a perfect symmetric or due proportion of each part; wherein
if he misse never so little, or if amongst so many wheeles and several
motions, the least be out of tune or temper, it is enough to marre
all. God knowes how hard the knowledge of most of these parts is: for
example, bow shall he finde out the proper signe of the disease, every
malady being capable of an infinite number of signes.  How many
debates, doubts at live the amongst themselves about the
interpretations of urine.  Otherwise, wbence should that continuall
altercation come we see amongst them about the knowledge of the
disease?  How should we excuse this fault, wherein they fall so often,
to take a martin for a fox?  In those diseases I have had (so they
admitted any difficulty) I could never yet finde three agreeing in one
opinion. I more willingly note examples that concerne my selfe.  A
gentleman in Paris was not long since cut for the stone by the
appointment of physitians, in whose bladder they found no more stone
then in his band: where also a Bishop, who was my very good friend,
had by his physitians been earnestly solicited to be cut; and my
selfe, because they were of his counsell, upon their words, aided to
perswade him to it; who being deceased and opened, it was found he bad
no infirmity but in his reines.  They are lesse excusable in this
disease, for so much as it is in some sort palpable.  Whereby I judge
the arte of chirurgery much more certaine; for it seeth and handleth
what it doth, and therein is lesse conjecture and divination.  Whereas
phisitians have no speculum matrices to discover our braine, our
lungs, and our liver unto them.  The very promises of physicke are
incredible.  For being to provide for divers and contrary accidents,
which often trouble us together, and with a kinde of necessary
relation one unto another, as the heate of the liver and the cold of
the stomacke, they will perswade us that with their ingredients this
one shall warme the stomacke, and this other coole the liver; the one
hath charge to goe directly to the reynes, yea even to the bladder,
without enstalling his operation anywhere else, and by reason of its
secret propriety, keeping his force and vertue all that long way, and
so full of stops or lets untill it come to the place to whose service
it is destinated.  Another shall drie the braine, and another moisten
the lungs.  Of all this hotch-pot having composed a mixture or potion,
is it not a kinde of raving to hope their several virtues shall divide
and separate themselves from out such a confusion or commixture, to
run to so divers charges?  I should greatly feare they would loose or
change their tickets and trouble their quarters.  And who can imagine,
that in this liquid confusion these faculties be not corrupted,
confounded, and alter one another?  For that the execution of this
ordinance depends on another officer, to whose trust and mercy we must
once more commit our lives?  As we have doublet and hose-makers to
make our cloths, and are so much the better fitted, inasmuch as each
medleth with his owne trade, and such have their occupation more
strictly limited then a tailer that will make all; and as for our
necessary foode, some of our great lords, for their more commodity and
ease, have severall cookes, as some only to dresse boyled meates, and
some to roste, others to bake; whereas if one cooke alone would supply
all three in generall he could never doe it so exactly: In like sort
for the curing of all diseases, the AEgyptians had reason to reject
this generall mysterie of physitians, and to sunder this profession
for every malady, allotting each part of the body his distinct
workman.  For every particular part was thereby more properly
attended, and lesse confusedly governed, and for so much as they
regarded but the same especially.  Our physitians never remember that
he who will provide for all provideth for nothing; and that the totall
and summarie policy of this little world is unto them undigestible.
Whilst they feared to stop the course of a bloody flux because he
should not fal into an ague, they killed a friend of mine who was more
worth then all the rabble of them, yea, were they as many more.  They
ballance their divinations of future things with present evils, and
because they will not cure the braine in prejudice of the stomacke,
they offend the stomacke and empaire the braine, and all by their
seditious and tumultuary drugs.  Concerning the variety and weaknes of
the reasons of this Art, it is more apparent then in any other Art.
Aperitive things are good for a man that's troubled wifh the collike,
because that opening and dilating the passages, they addresse this
slimy matter whereof the gravel and stone is engendred, and so convay
downeward whatsoever beginneth to harden and petrifie in the reines:
aperitive things are dangerous for a man thats troubled with the
collick, because that opening and dilating the passages, they addresse
towards the reines the matter engeridring gravell, which by reason of
the propensions they have with it, easily seizing on the same, must by
consequence stay great store of that which is convaied unto them.
Moreover, if by chance it fortune to meet with a body somewhat more
grosse then it ought to be, to passe all those strait turnings, which
to expel the same they must glide thorow; that body being moved by
those soluble things, and cast in those strait chanels, and comming to
stop them, it will doubtlesse hasten a certain and most dolorous
death.  They have a like constancy about the counsels they give us,
touching the regiment of our life.  It is good to make water often;
for by experience we see that permitting the same idlely to ly still,
we give it leisure to discharge it selfe of her lees and excrements,
which may serve to breed the stone in the bladder.  It is good to make
water but seldome, for the weighty dregs it drawes with it are not
easily carried away except by violence: as by experience is seene in a
torrent that runneth very swift, which sweepeth and clenseth the place
through which he passeth, much more than doth a slow-gliding streame.
Likewise it is good to have often copulation with women, for that
openeth the passages, and convaieth the gravell away: it is also
hurtfull, for it heateth, wearieth, and weakneth the reines.  It is
good for one to bathe himselfe in warme water, forsomuch as that
looseth and moistneth the places where the gravel and stone lurketh:
it is also bad, because this application of externall heat helpeth the
reines to concoct, to harden and petrifie the matter disposed unto it.
To such as are at the bathes, it is more healthful to eat but little
at night, that the water they are to drink the next morning, finding
the stomacke empty, and without any obstacle, it may worke the greater
operation: on the other side, it is better to eat but a little at
dinner, lest a man might hinder the operation of the water, which is
not yet perfect, and not to charge the stomacke so suddenly, after
this other travell, and leave the office of digesting unto the night,
which can better do it then the day; the body and spirit being then in
continual motion and action. Loe heere how they in all their
discourses juggle, daily, and trifle at our charge, and are never able
to bring mee a proposition, but I can presently frame another to the
contrary of like force and consequence.  Let them then no longer raile
against those who in any sicknes suffer themselves gently to be
directed by their owne appetite, and by the counsell of nature, and
who remit themselves to common fortune.  I have by occasion of my
travels seene almost all the famous bathes of Christendome, and some
years since have begun to use them: for in generall I deeme bathing to
be very good and healthy, and I am perswaded we incurre no small
incommodities in our health by having neglected and lost this custome,
which in former times were generally observed very neere amongst all
nations, and is yet with divers at this time to wash their bodies
every day.  And I cannot imagine but that we are much the worse with
keeping our bodies all over- crusted, and our pores stopt with grease
and filth.  And touching the drinking of them, fortune hath first made
it to agree very well with in taste; secondly, it is naturall and
simple, and though vaine, nothing dangerous; whereof this infinity of
people of al sorts and complexions, and of all nations that come to
them, doth warrant mee.  And although I have as yet found no
extraordinary good or wondrous effect in them, but rather having
somewhat curiously examined the matter, I finde all the reports of
such operations, which in such places are reported, and of many
believed, to be false and fabulous.  So easily doth the world deceive
itselfe, namely, in things it desireth or faine would have come to
passe.  Yet have I seen but few or none at al whom these waters have
made worse; and no man can without malice denie but that they stirre
up a mans appetite, make easie digestion, and except a man goe to them
overweake and faint (which I would have none doe) they will adde a
kinde of new mirth unto him.  They have not the power to raise men
from desperate diseases.  They may stay some light accident, or
prevent the threats of some alteration.  Whosoever goeth to them and
resolveth not to be merry, that so he may enjoy the pleasure of the
good company resorts to them, and of the pleasant walks or exercises
which the beauty of those places, where bathes are commonly seated,
doth affoord and delight men withall; he without doubt loseth the
better part and most assured of their effect. And therefore have I
hitherto chosen to stay my self and make use of those, where I found
the pleasure of the situation most delightsome, most conveniencie of
lodging, of victuals and company, as are in France the bathes of
Banieres; those of Plombieres, on the frontiers of Germany and
Loraine: those of Baden in Switzerland; those of Luca in Tuscanie; and
especially those della Villa, which I have used most often and at
divers seasons of the yeare. Every nation hath some particular opinion
concerning their use, and severall lawes and formes how to use them,
and all different: and as I have found by experience the effect in a
manner all one.  In Germanie they never use to drinke of the waters,
but bathe themselves for all diseases, and will lie paddling in them
almost from sunne to sunne.  In Italie, if they drinke nine dayes of
the water, they wash themselves other thirtie dayes with it.  And
commonly they drinke it mixt with other drugges, thereby to helpe the
operation. Here, our physitians appoint us when wee have drunke to
walk upon it that so wee may helpe to digest it: there, so soone as
they have drunke, they make them lie a bed until they have voyded the
same out againe, continually warming their stomack and feete with
warme clothes.  All the Germanes whilest they lie in the water doe
particularly use cupping glasses and scarifications; and the Italians
use their doccie, which are certaine spouts running with warme waters
convayed from the bathes-spring in leaden pipes, where, for the space
of a month, they let it spout upon their heads, upon their stomacke,
or upon any other part of the bodie, according as neede requireth, one
houre in the forenoone and as long in the afternoone.  There are
infinit other differences of customes in every countrey, or, to say
better, there is almost no resemblances betweene one and the other.
See how this part of physicke by which alone I have suffered myselfe
to be carried away, which, though it be least artificiall, yet hath
she the share of the confusion and uncertainty seene in all other
parts and every where of this arte. Poets may say what they list, and
with more emphasis and grace witnesse these two epigrammes:

  Alcon hesterno signum lovis attiqit .  Ille

  Quamvis marmoreus, vim patitur medici.

  Ecce hodie jussus transferri ex aede vetusta,

  Efertur, quamvis sit Deus atque lapis.


----- 1 LUCIL.  Auson.  Epig. 73.

  Alcon look't yesterday on carved Iove.

  Iove, though of marble, feeles the leeches force,

  From his old church to day made to remoove,

  Though god and stone, hee's carried like a corse.

  And the other:

  Lotus nobiscum est hilaris, caenavit et idem,

  Inventus mane est mortuus Androgoras.

  Tam subitae mortis causam Faustine requiris?

  Insomnis medicum viderat Hermocratem./1

  Androgoras in health bath'd over night with us,

  And merry supt, but in the morne starke dead was found.

  Of his so sudden death the cause shall I discusse?

  Hermocrates the leech he saw in sleepe unsound.

Upon which I will tell you two pretty stories. The Baron of Caupene in
Chalosse and I have both in common the right of the patronage of a
benefice, which is of a very large precinct, situated at the feet of
our mountaines named Lahontan.  It is with the inhabitants of that
corner as it is said to be with those of the valley of Angrougne. They
lead a kind of peculiar life; their attire and their customes apart
and severall.  They were directed and governed by certaine particular
policies and customes,, received by tradition from father to child:
whereto, without other lawes or compulsion except the reverence and
awe of their custome and use, they awefully tied and bound themselves.
This petty state had from all antiquity continued in so happy a
condition that no neighbouring severe judge had ever beene troubled to
enquire of their life and affaires, nor was ever atturny or
petty-fogging lawyer called for to give them advice or counsel; nor
stranger sought unto to determine their quarrels or decide
contentions; neither were ever beggars seen among them.  They alwaies
avoyded commerce and shunned alliances with the other world, lest they
should alter the purity of their orders and policy, until such time
(as they say) that one amongst them in their fathers daies, having a
mind puft up with a noble ambition to bring his name

----- 1 MART. 1. vi.  Epig. liii.

and credit in reputation, devised to make one of his children Sir John
Lacke-latine or Master Peter-an-oake: and having made him learne to
write in some neigbbour towne not far off, at last procured him to be
a country Notary or petty-fogging clark.  This fellow having gotten
some pelfe and become great, began to disdaine their ancient customes
and put the pompe and statelines of our higher regions into their
heads.  It fortuned that a chiefe gossip of his had a goate
dis-horned, whom he so importunately solicited to sue the trespasser
and demand law and right at the justices hands that dwelt thereabouts;
and so never ceasing to sow sedition and breed suites amongst his
neighbours, he never left till he had confounded and marred all.
After this corruption or intrusion of law (they say) there ensued
presently another mischiefe of worse consequence by means of a quacke-
salver or empirike physitian that dwelt amongst them who would needes
be married to one of their daughters, and so endenizon and settle
himself amongst them.  This gallant began first to teach and instruct
them in the names of agues, rheumes, and impostumes; then the
situation of the heart, of the liver and other intrailes: a science
untill then never known or heard of among them.  And in stead of
garlike, wherewith they had learned to expell and were wont to cure
all diseases of what qualitie and how dangerous soever they were, he
induced and inured them, were it but for a cough or cold, to take
strange compositions and potions: and thus beganne to trafficke not
only their health but also their deaths.  They sweare that even from
that time they apparently perceived that the evening sereine or
night-calme bred the head-ache and blasted them; that to drinke being
hot or in a sweat empaired their healths; that autumne windes were
more unwholesome and dangerous than those of the spring-time: and that
since his slibber-sawces, potions, and physicke came first in use,
they find themselves molested and distempered with legions of
unaccustomed maladies and unknowne diseases, and plainly feele and
sensibly perceive a generall weaknesse and declination in their
ancient vigor, and that their lives are nothing so long as before they
were.  Loe here the first of my tales.  The other is that before I was
troubled with the stone- chollicke and gravell in the bladder, hearing
divers make especiall account of a hee-goates blood as a heavenly
manna sent in these latter ages for the good and preservation of mans
life and hearing men of good understanding speake of it as of an
admirable and much-good-working drugge and of an infallible operation:
I, who have ever thought my selfe subject to all accidents that may in
any sort fall on man, being yet in perfect health, began to take
pleasure to provide my selfe of this myracle, and forthwith gave order
(according to the receipt) to have a buck-goate gotten and carefully
fed in my own house.  For the blood must be drawne from him in the
hottest month of summer, and he must only be fed with soluble hearbes,
and drincke nothing but white-wine.  It was my fortune to come to mine
owne house the very same day the Goate should be killed; where some of
my people came in haste to tell me that my cooke found two or three
great bowles in his pauncb, which in his maw amongst his meat shocked
one against another.  I was so curious as I would needes have all his
garbage brought before me; the thicke and large skinne whereof I
caused to be opened, out of which came three great lumps or bodies, as
light as any spunge, so framed as they seemed to be hollow, yet
outwardly hard and very firme, bemotled with divers dead and wannish
colours; the one perfectly as round as any bowle, the other two
somewhat lesser, and not so round, yet seemed to grow towards it.  I
have found (after I had made diligent inquiry among such as were wont
to open such beasts) that it was a seld-seene and unheard of accident.
It is very likely they were such stones as ours be, and cozen-germanes
to them; which if it be, it is but vaine for such as be troubled with
the stone or gravell to hope to be cured by meanes of a beasts blood,
that was drawing neere unto death, and suffered the same disease.
For, to aleadge the blood cannot participate of that contagion, and
doth no whit thereby alter his accustomed vertue, it may rather be
inferred that nothing engendreth in a body but by consent and
communication of all the parts.  The whole masse doth worke, and the
whole frame agitate altogether, although one part, according to the
diversitie of operations, doth contribute more or lesse than another;
whereby it manifestly appeareth that, in all parts of this
bucke-goate, there was some grettie or petrificant qualitie.  It was
not so much for feare of any future chaunce, or in regard of my selfe,
that I was so curious of this experiment; as in respect, that as well
in mine owne house as elsewere in sundry other places, it commeth to
passe that many women do often gather and lay up in store divers such
kindes of slight druggs to help their neighbours and other'people with
them in time of necessitie; applying one same remedie to an hundred
severall diseases: yea many times such as they would be very loath to
take themselves; with which they often have good lucke, and well
thrives it with them.  As for me, I honour physitians, not according
to the common-received rule, for necessitie sake (for to this passage
another of the prophets may be alleaged who reprooved King Asa,
because he had recourse unto physitians) but rather for love I beare
unto themselves; having seene some, and knowne diverse honest men
amongst them, and worthy all love and esteeme.  It is not them I
blame, but their arte; yet doe I not greatly condemne them for seeking
to profit by our foolishnesse (for most men do so) and it is a thing
common to all worldlings.  Diverse possessions and many vocations,
both more and lesse worthie than theirs, subsist and are grounded
onely upon publike abuses and popular errours.  I send for them when I
am sicke, if they may conveniently be found, and love to be
entertained by them, rewarding them as other men doe.  I give them
authority to enjoyne me, to keepe my selfe warme if I love it better
so than otherwise. They may chuse, be it either leekes or lettuce,
what my broth shall be made withall, and appoint me either white or
claret to drink: and so of other things else, indifferent to my taste,
humour or custome.  I know well it is nothing to them, forsomuch as
sharpnesse and strangenesse are accidents of physickes proper
essence. Lycurgus allowed and appoynted the sicke men of Sparta to
drinke wine. Why did he so?  Because being in health they hated the
use of it.  Even as a gentleman who dwelleth not farre from me useth
wine as a sovereigns remedie against agews, because being in perfect
health, he hateth the taste thereof as death.  How many of them see we
to be of my humour?  That is, to disdaine all physicke for their owne
behoofe, and live a kinde of formall free life, and altogether
contrary to that which they prescribe to other?  And what is that but
a manifest abusing of our simplicitie.  For, they hold their life as
deare and esteeme their health as pretious as wee do ours, and would
apply their effects to their skill if themselves knew not the
uncertainty and falsehood of it.  It is the feare of paine and death;
the impatience of the disease and griefe: and indiscreet desire and
headlong thirst of health, that so blindeth them and us.  It is meere
faintnes that makes our conceit: and pusillanimitie forceth our
credulitie to be so yeelding, and pliable..  The greater part of whom
doe notwithstanding not beleeve so much as they endure and suffer of
others; For I heare them complaine, and speake of it no otherwise than
we doe.  Yet in the end are they resolved.  What should I doe then?
As if impatience were in it selfe a better remedie than patience.  Is
there any of them that hath yeelded to this miserable subjection, that
doth not likewise yeelde to all maner of impostures? or dooth not
subject himselfe to the mercie of whomsoever hath the impudencie to
promise him recoverie and warrant him health?  The Babilonians were
wont to carry their sicke people into the open streetes: the common
sort were there physitians: where all such as passed by were by
humanitie and civilitie to enquire of their state and maladie, and
according to their skill or experience give them some sound advise and
good counsell. We differ not greatly from them: there is no poore
woman so simple whose mumbling and muttering, whose slibber-slabbes
and drenches we doe not employ. And as for mee, were I to buy any
medicine, I would rather spend my money in this kinde of physicke than
in any other, because therein is no danger or hurt to be feared.  What
Homer and Plato said of the AEgyptians, that they were all physitians,
may well be said of all people.  There is neither man nor woman that
vanteth not himselfe to have some receipt or other, and doth not
hazard the same upon his neighbour, if he will but give credite unto
him.  I was not long since in a company where I wot not who of my
fraternity brought newes of a kinde of pilles, by true accompt,
composed of a hundred and odde severall ingredients; whereat we
laughed very heartily, and made our selves good sport; for what rocke
so hard were able to resist the shocke or withstand the force of so
thicke and numerous a battery?  I understand, neverthelesse, of such
as tooke of them, that the least graine of gravell dained not to
stirre at all.  I cannot so soone give over writing of this subject,
but I must needs say a word or two concerning the experience they have
made of their prescriptions, which they would have us take as a
warantice or assurance of the certainty of their drugges and potions.
The greatest number, and, as I deeme, more than the two thirds of
medicinable vertues, consist in the quintessence or secret propriety
of simples, whereof wee can have no other instruction but use and
custome.  For quintessence is no other thing than equality, whereof
wee cannot with our reason finde out the cause.  In such trials or
experiments, those which they affirme to have acquired by the
inspiration of some daemon, I am contented to receive and allow of
them (for touching myracles, I meddle not with them) or be it the
experiments drawne from things, which for other respects fall often in
use with us: as if in wooll, wherewith we wont to cloth our selves,
some secret exsiccating or drying quality have by accident beene
found, that cureth kibes and chilblaines in the heeles and if in
reddishes, we eat for nourishment, some opening or atentive operation
have beene discovered.  Galen reporteth that a leprous man chanced to
be cured by meanes of a cuppe of wine he had drunken forsomuch as a
viper was by fortune fallen into the wine caske.  In which example we
finde the meane and a very likely director to this experience.  As
also in those to which physitians affirme to have beene addressed by
the examples of some beasts.  But in most of other experiences to
which they say they came by fortune, and had no other guide but
hazard, I finde the progresse of this information incredible.  I
imagine man heedfully viewing about him the infinite number of things,
creatures, plants and mettals.  I wot not where to make him beginne
his essay; and suppose he cast his first fantasie upon an elkes-horne,
to which an easie and gentle credulity must be given; he will be as
farre to seeke, and as much troubled in his second operation: so, many
diseases and severall circumstances are proposed unto him, that before
he come to the certainty of this point, unto which the perfection of
his experience should arrive, mans wit shall be to seeke, and not know
where to turne himselfe; and before (amiddest this infinity of things)
he finde out what this horne is: amongst the numberlesse diseases that
are, what an epilepsie is; the sundry and manifolde complexions in a
melancholy man; so many seasons in winter: so diverse nations amongst
Frenchmen; so many ages in age; so diverse celestiall changes and
alterations in the conjunction of Venus and Saturne: so severall and
many partes in a mans body, nay in one of his fingers.  To all which
being neither guided by Argument, nor by conjecture, nor by example or
divine inspiration, but by the onely motion of fortune, it were most
necessar it should be by a perfectly artificiall, well-ordred, and
methodicall fortune.  Moreover, suppose the disease thorowly cured,
how shall he rest assured but that either the evill was come to his
utmost period, or that an effect of the hazard caused the same health?
Or the operation of some other thing, which that day he had either
eaten, drunke or touched? or whether it were by the merite of his
grandmothers prayers?  Besides, suppose this experiment to have beene
perfect, how many times was it applied and begun anew; and how often
was this long and tedious web of fortunes and encounters woven over
againe, before a certaine rule might be concluded? And being
concluded, by whom is it I pray you I?  Amongst so many millions of
men you shall scarce meet with three or foure that will duely observe
and carefully keepe a register of their experiments: shall it be your
or his happe to light truely or hit just with one of them three or
foure? What if another man, nay, What if a hundred other men, have had
and made contrary experiments, and yet have sorted well?  We should
peradventure discerne some shew of light if all the judgements and
consultations of men were knowne unto us.  But that three witnesses
and three doctors shall sway all mankind, there is no reason.  It were
requisite humane nature had appointed and made speciall choise of
them, and that by expresse procuration and letter of atturny they were
by her declared our judges and deputed our atturnies.

CHAPTER 2.XXXVIII+ TO MY LADY OF DURAS

MADAME, the last time it pleased you to come and visite me, you found
me upon this point.  And because it may be these toyes of mine may
happily come to your hands, I would have them witnesse their author
reputeth himselfe highly honoured for the favours it shall please you
to shew them.  Wherein you shall discerne the very same demeanor and
selfe-countenance you have seene in his conversation.  And could I
have assumed unto my selfe any other fashion than mine owne
accustomed, or more honourable and better forme, I would not have done
it: for al I seeke to reape by my writings is, they will naturally
represent and to the life pourtray me to your remembrance. The very
same condition and faculties it pleased your Ladyship to frequent and
receive with much more honor and curtesie than they any way deserve, I
will place and reduce (but without alteration and change) into a
solide body, which may happily continue some dayes and yeares after
mee: where, when soever it shall please you to refresh your memory
with them, you may easily finde them, without calling them to
remembrance, which they scarcely deserve.  I would entreate you to
continue the favour of your friend-ship towards me, by the same
qualities through whose meanes it was produced. I labour not to be
beloved more and esteemed better being dead that alive. The humour of
Tiberius is ridiculous and common, who endevoured more to extinguish
his glory in future ages, than yeelde himself regardfull and pleasing
to men of his times.  If I were one of those to whom the world may be
indebted for praise, I would quit it for the one moytie, on condition
it would pay me beforehand: and that the same would hasten and in
great heapes environ me about, more thicke than long, and more full
than lasting.  And let it hardly vanish with my knowledge, and when
this sweet alluring sound shall no more tickle mine eares.  It were a
fond conceit, now I am ready to leave the commerce of men, by new
commendations, to goe about anew to beget my selfe unto them.  I make
no account of goods which I could not employ to the use of my life.
Such as I am, so would I be elsewhere then in paper. Mine art and
industry have been employed to make my selfe of some worth. My study
and endevour to doe, and not to write. {deeds+} I have applied all my
skill and devoire to frame my life.  Lo heere mine occupation and my
worke.  I am a lesse maker of bookes then of any thing else.  I have
desired and aimed at sufficiencie, rather for the benefite of my
present and essentiall commodities then to make a store- house and
hoard it up for mine heires. Whosoever hath any worth in him, let him
shew it in his behaviour, maners and ordinary discourses; be it to
treat of love or of quarrels; of sport and play or bed-matters, at
board or elsewhere; or be it in the conduct of his owne affaires, or
private household matters.  Those whom I see make good bookes, having
tattered hosen and ragged clothes on, had they believed me they should
first have gotten themselves good clothes.  Demand a Spartan, whether
he would rather be a cunning rhetorician then an excellent souldier:
nay, were I asked, I would say a good cooke, had I not some to serve
me. Good Lord (Madame) how I would hate such a commendation, to be a
sufficient man in writing, {PlainDealer+} and a foolish-shallow-headed
braine or coxcombe in all things else: yet had I rather be a foole,
both here and there, then to have made so base a choice wherein to
imploy my worth.  So farre am I also from eexpecting by such trifles
to gaine new honour to my self, as I shal think I make a good bargain
if I loose not a part of that little I had already gained.  For
besides that this dumbe and dead picture shall derogate and steale
from my naturall being, it fadgeth not and hath no reference unto my
better state, but is much fallen from my first vigor and naturall
jollity, enclining to a kind of drooping or mouldinesse.  I am now
come to the bottome of the vessel, which beginneth to taste of his
dregs and lees.  Otherwise (good Madame) I should not have dared so
boldly to have ripped up the mysteries of physicke, considering the
esteeme and credite of your selfe, and so many others, ascribe unto
it, and hold it in; had I not beene directed thereunto by the authors
of the same, I thinke they have but two ancient ones in Latine, to wit
Pliny and Celsus.  If you fortune at any time to looke unto them, you
shall finde them to speake much more rudely of their art then I doe.
I but pinch it gently; they cut the throate of it.  Pliny, amongst
other things, doth much scoffe at them, forsomuch as when they are at
their wits end, and can go no further, they have found out this goodly
shift to send their long-turmoiled, and to no end much tormented
patient, with their drugs and diets, some to the helpe of their vowes
and myracles, and some others to hot baths and waters. (Be not
offended, noble Lady, he meaneth not those on this side, under the
protection of your house, and all Gramontoises.) They have a third
kinde of shift or evasion to shake off and discharge themselves of the
amputations or aches wee may justly charge them with, for the
amendment of our infirmities; whereof they have so long had the survay
and government, as they have, no more inventions or devises left them
to ammuse us with; that is, to send us to seeke and take the good aire
of some other country.  Madam, we have harped long enough upon one
string; I hope you will give me leave to come to my former discourses
againe, from which, for your better entertainment, I had somewhat
disgressed.  It was (as farre as I remember) Pericles, who being
demanded how he did, 'you may,' said he, 'judge it by this,' shewing
certaine scroules or briefes he had tied about his necke and armes.
He would infer that he was very sicke, since he was forced to have
recourse to such vanities, and had suffered himselfe to be so drest.
I affirme not but I may one day be drawne to such fond opinions, and
yeeld my life and health to the mercy, discretion, and regiment of
physitians.  I may haply fall into this fond madnesse; I dare not
warrant my future constancy.  And even then if any aske me how I doe,
I may answer him as did Pericles: you may judge, by shewing my hand
fraughted with six drammes of opium.  It will be an evident token of a
violent sicknesse.  My judgement shall be exceedingly out of temper.
If impacience or feare get that advantage upon me, you may thereby
conclude some quelling fever hath seized upon my minde.  I have taken
the paines to plead this cause, whereof I have but small
understanding, somewhat to strengthen and comfort naturall propension
against the drugs and practice of our physicke, which is derived into
me from mine ancestors: lest it might only be a stupid and rash
inclination, and that it might have a little more forme.  And that
also those who see me so constant against the exhortations and threats
which are made against me, when sicknesse commeth upon me, may not
thinke it to be a meere conceit and simple wilfulnesse; and also, lest
there be any so peevish as to judge it to be some motive of vaine
glory.  It were a strange desire to seeke to draw honour from an
action common both to me, to my gardiner, or, to my groome.  Surely my
heart is not so pufft up, nor so windy, that a solide, fleshy and
marrowy pleasure as health is, I should change it for an imaginary
spiritual and airy delight. Renowne or glory (were it that of Aymons
foure sons) is over deerely bought by a man of my humour, if it cost
him but three violent fits of the chollike. Give me health a Gods
name.  Those that love our physicke may likewise have their
considerations good, great and strong; I hate no fantasies contrary to
mine.  I am so far from vexing my selfe to see my judgement differ
from other mens, or to grow incompatible of the society or
conversation of men, to be of any other faction or opinion then mine
owne; that contrariwise (as variety is the most generall fashion that
nature hath followed, and more in the mindes then in the bodies:
forsomuch as they are of a more supple and yeelding substance, and
susceptible or admitting of formes) I finde it more rare to see our
humor or desseignes agree in one.  And never were there two opinions
in the world alike, no more than two haires or two graines. Diversity
is the most universall quality.
