Erasmus's Education of a Christian Prince

SOURCE: Desiderius Erasmus. The Education of a Christian Prince
(1516). Translated by Lester K. Born [c.1936]. Columbia University
Records of Civilization. New York: Octagon Books, 1963. I have not
included the translator's 130-page Introduction. Permission to
reproduce this text in electronic form on the web has been granted by
Columbia University Press. Before using any portion of this text in
any theme, essay, research paper, thesis, or dissertation, please read
the disclaimer.

TO THE MOST ILLUSTRIOUS PRINCE CHARLES, GRANDSON OF THE INVINCIBLE
CAESAR MAXIMILIAN, DESIDERIUS ERASMUS OF ROTTERDAM SENDS GREETINGS

Wisdom is not only an extraordinary attribute in itself, Charles, most
bountiful of princes, but according to Aristotle+/1 no form of wisdom
is greater than that which teaches a prince how to rule
beneficently. Accordingly,Xenophon+/2 was quite correct in saying in
his Oeconomicus that he thought it something beyond the human sphere
and clearly divine, to rule over free and willing subjects. That kind
of wisdom is indeed to be sought by princes, which Solomon as a youth
of good parts, spurning all else, alone desired, and which he wished
to be his constant companion on the throne. This is that purest and
most beautiful wisdom of Sunamite, by whose embraces alone was David
pleased, he that wisest son of an all-wise father. This is the wisdom
which is referred to in Proverbs:/3 "Through me princes rule, and the
powerful pass judgment." Whenever kings call this wisdom into council
and exclude those basest of advisers - ambition+, wrath+, cupidity,
andflattery+ - the state flourishes in every way and, realizing that
its prosperity comes from the wisdom of the prince, rejoices rightly
in itself with these words:/4 "All good things together come to me
with her [i.e., wisdom]." Plato/5 is nowhere more painstaking than in
the training of his guardians of the state. He does not wish them to
excel all others in wealth, in gems, in dress, in statues and
attendants, but in wisdom alone. He says that no state will ever be
blessed unless the philosophers are at the helm, or those to whom the
task of government falls embrace philosophy. By "philosophy" I do not
mean that which disputes concerning the first beginnings of primordial
matter, of motion and infinity, but that which frees the mind from the
false opinions and the vicious predilections of the masses and points
out a theory of government according to the example of the Eternal
Power. It was something such as this that Homer/6 had in mind when [he
had]/7 Mercury protect Ulysses against the potions of Circe with the
molu flower. And not without reason did Plutarch/8 say that no one
serves the state better than he who imbues the mind of the prince, who
provides and cares for everyone and everything, with the best of ideas
and those most becoming a prince. On the other hand, no one brings so
serious a blight upon the affairs of men as he who has corrupted the
heart of the prince with depraved ideas and desires. He is no
different from one who has poisoned the public fountain whence all men
drink. Likewise Plutarch/9 judges not inapposite that celebrated
remark of Alexander the Great: Departing from the talk he had had with
Diogenes the Cynic, and still marveling at his philosophic spirit, so
proud, unbroken, unconquered, and superior to all things human, he
said, "If I were not Alexander, I should like to be Diogenes." Nay, as
great authority is exposed to so many storms, the more was that spirit
of Diogenes to be sought after, since he could rise to the measure of
such towering tumults.

But as much as you surpass Alexander in good fortune, mighty prince
Charles, so much do we hope you will surpass him in wisdom. For he had
gained a mighty empire, albeit one not destined to endure, solely
through bloodshed. You have been born to a splendid kingdom and are
destined to a still greater one. As Alexander had to toil to carry out
his invasions, so will you have to labor to yield, rather than to
gain, part of your power. You owe it to the powers of heaven that you
came into a kingdom untainted with blood, bought through no evil
connection. It will be the lot of your wisdom to keep it bloodless and
peaceful. You have the inborn nature, the soundness of mind, the force
of character, and you have received a training under the most reliable
preceptors. So many examples from your ancestors surround you on every
side, that we all have the highest hopes that Charles will some day do
what the world long hoped his father Philip would do. And he [Philip]
would not have disappointed the popular expectation if death had not
cut him off before his time. And so, although I am not unaware that
your highness does not need the advice of anyone, and least of all my
advice, yet it has seemed best to set forth the likeness of the
perfect prince for general information, but addressed to you. In this
way those who are being brought up to rule great kingdoms will receive
their theory of government through you and take their example from
you. At the same time the good from this treatise will spread out to
all under your auspices, and we of your entourage may manifest
somewhat by these first fruits, as it were, the zeal of our spirit
toward you.

We have done into Latin Isocrates's precepts on ruling a kingdom. We
have fashioned ours, set off with subject headings so as to be less
inconvenient to the reader, after the fashion of his, but differing
not a little from his suggestions. That sophist was instructing a
young king, or rather a tyrant: one pagan instructing another. I, a
theologian, am acting the part of teacher to a distinguished and
pure-hearted prince - one Christian to another. If I were writing
these things for a prince of more advanced age, I should perhaps come
under the suspicions of some for flattery or impertinence. But since
this little book is dedicated to one who, although he evidences the
highest hopes for himself, is still so youthful and so recently
installed in his power that he could not as yet do many things which
people are wont to praise or censure in princes, I am free from
suspicion on both charges and cannot appear to have sought any object
beyond the public welfare. That to the friends of kings (as to kings
themselves) ought to be the only aim. Among the countless distinctions
and praises which virtue, by the will of God, will prepare for you,
this will be no small part: Charles was such an one that anyone could
without the mark of flattery present [to him] the likeness of a pure
and true Christian prince, which the excellent prince would happily
recognize, or wisely imitate as a young man always eager to better
himself. With best wishes./10

----- 10 This letter is found in Allen (Ep. 393) as well as in both
editions of the Opera omnia where it immediately precedes the text of
the Institutio. In the title to the work itself, which immediately
follows, Erasmus does not use capitula, the obvious word for
"chapters." His Latin reads aphorismis digests, which could also be
translated as "marked off with side-headings."

~THE EDUCATION OF A CHRISTIAN PRINCE

separated into pertinent chapters so that it may be less burdensome to
read

by Desiderius Erasmus of Rotterdam

[ I+. THE QUALITIES, EDUCATION, AND SIGNIFICANCE OF A CHRISTIAN
PRINCE]


When a prince is to be chosen by election it is not at all appropriate
to look to the images of his forefathers, to consider his physical
appearance, his height of stature (which we read that some barbarians
once most stupidly did) and to seek a quiet and placid trend of
spirit./2 Seek rather a nature staid, in no way rash, and not so
excitable that there is danger of his developing into a tyrant+ under
the license of good fortune+ and casting aside all regard for advisers
and counselors. Yet have a care that he be not so weak as to be turned
now this way and now that by whomsoever he meets./3 Consider also his
experience and his age - not so severe as to be entirely out of
sympathy with frivolity, nor so impetuous as to be carried away by
flights of fancy. Perhaps some consideration should also be paid to
the state of health of the prince so that there will be no danger of a
sudden/4 succession to be filled, which would be a hardship on the
state.

---- Footnotes ----

1 These references give the pages in the Opera omnia (Basle, 1540), IV
(de- signated as B), and in the Opera omnia (Leyden, 17O5-6), IV
(designated as L), in which the Latin text of the Institutio is most
easily accessible. 2 Cf. Plato Laws IV. 715; see also Seneca
Ep. Mor. XLIV. 3-4. Throughout the translation references specifically
cited or quoted by Erasmus have been cited in the notes; references to
passages which may well have suggested the thought to Erasmus because
of his familiarity with the writer from whom they are taken or because
they are such striking parallels that mere coincidence would be hard
to explain, have also been cited, but always prefixed by "cf." No
attempt has been made to load the text with miscellaneous learning;
any critic could suggest many more passages to add as general
parallels or illustrative material. Such information is contained in
detail in Chapters III and V of the Introduction and is not repeated
here. 3 Cf. Plato States. 311; Rep. VI. 503. 4 The Latin word is
respublica, "commonwealth+." Since Erasmus is not concerned with the
discussions of the "state" in connection with sovereignty, etc., and
regularly employs the word civitas to mean city, I have consistently
rendered respublica as "state." Any other word so rendered has been
noted in the text where it occurs.

---------------------

In navigation the wheel is not given to him who surpasses his fellows
in birth, wealth, or appearance, but rather to him who excels in his
skill as a navigator, in his alertness, and in his dependability. Just
so with the rule of a state: most naturally the power should be
entrusted to him who excels all in the requisite kingly qualities of
wisdom, justice, moderation, foresight, and zeal for the public
welfare./5

Statues, gold, and gems contribute no more to state government than
they do to a master in steering his ship. That one idea which should
concern a prince in ruling, should likewise concern the people in
selecting their prince: the public weal, free from all private
interests./6

The more difficult it is to change your choice, the more circumspectly
should your candidate be chosen, or else the rashness of a single hour
may spread its retributions over a lifetime. There is no choice,
however, in the case of hereditary succession of princes. This was the
usual practice with various barbarian nations of old, as Aristotle/7
tells us, and it is also almost universally accepted in our own
times. Under that condition, the chief hope for a good prince is from
his education, which should be especially looked to. In this way the
interest in his education will compensate for the loss of the right of
election. Hence, from the very cradle, as it were, the mind of the
future prince, while still open and unmolded, must be filled with
salutary thoughts./8 Then the seeds of morality must be sown in the
virgin soil of his spirit so that little by little they may grow and
mature through age and experience, to remain firmly implanted
throughout the course of life. Nothing remains so deeply and
tenaciously rooted as those things learned in the first years. What is
absorbed in those years is of prime importance to all, especially in
the case of a prince.

When there is no opportunity to choose the prince, care should be
exercised in the same manner in choosing the tutor to the future
prince. That a prince be born of worthy character

---- Footnotes ---- 5 Cf. Plato Rep. VI. 487-89; see also Aristotle
Pol. 111. 13; II. 9; I. 13. Cf. Cicero De off. 1. 25. 85. 7
Pol. III. 14. 8 Cf. Plato Rep. II. 377; Plutarch Training of Children
5.

-------------------

we must beseech the gods above; that a prince born of good parts may
not go amiss, or that one of mediocre accomplishments may be bettered
through education is mainly within our province. It was formerly the
custom to decree Statues, arches, and honorary titles to those
deserving honor from the state. None is more worthy of this honor than
he who labors faithfully and zealously in the proper training of the
prince [B 434] and looks not to personal emolument but rather to the
welfare of his country. A country owes everything to a good prince;
him it owes to the man who made him such by his moral principles./9
There is no better time to shape and improve a prince than when he
does not yet realize himself a prince. This time must be diligently
employed, not only to the end that for a while he may be kept away
from base associations, but also that he may be imbued with certain
definite moral principles. If diligent parents raise with great care a
boy who is destined to inherit only an acre or two, think how much
interest and concern should be given to the education of one who will
succeed not to a single dwelling, but to so many peoples, to so many
cities, yea, to the world, either as a good man for the common gain of
all, or an evil one, to the great ruination of all! It is a great and
glorious thing to rule an empire well, but nonetheless glorious to
pass it on to no worse a ruler: nay, rather it is the main task of a
good prince to see that he does not become a bad one. So conduct your
rule as if this were your aim: "My equal shall never succeed me I" In
the meantime, raise your children for future rule as if it were your
desire to be succeeded by a better prince. There can be no more
splendid commendation of a worthy prince than to say that he left such
a successor to the state, that he himself seemed average by
comparison. His own glory cannot be more truly shown than to be so
obscured. The worst possible praise is that a ruler who was
intolerable during his life is longingly missed as a good and
beneficial prince each time a worse man ascends the throne. Let the
good and wise prince always so educate his children that he seems ever
to have remembered

---- Footnotes ----

9 Cf. Plutarch A Philosopher Is to Converse with Great Men 1-3

-------------------

that they were born for the state and are being educated for the
state, not for his own fancy. {onus+} Concern for the state must
always be superior to the personal feelings of the parent. However
many statues he may set up, however many massive works he may erect, a
prince can have no more excellent monument to his worth than a son,
splendid in every way, who is like his excellent father in his
outstanding deeds. He does not die, who leaves a living likeness of
himself! The prince should choose for this duty teachers from among
all the number of his subjects - or even summon from every direction
men of good character, unquestioned principles, serious, of long
experience and not merely learned in theories - to whom advancing
years {Kent+} provide deep respect; purity of life, prestige;
sociability and an affable+ manner, love+ and friendship+. Thus a
tender young spirit may not be cut by the severity of its training and
learn to hate worthiness before it knows it; nor on the other hand,
debased by the unseasoned indulgence of its tutor, slip back where it
should not." In the education of anyone, but especially in the case of
a prince, the teacher must adopt a mid-course; he should be stern
enough to suppress the wild pranks of youth, yet have a friendly
understanding to lessen and temper the severity of his restraint."
Such a man should the future prince's tutor be (as Seneca elaborately
sets forth)/12, that he can scold without railing, praise without
flattering, be revered for his stainless life, and loved for his
pleasing manner.

Some princes exercise themselves greatly over the proper care of a
beautiful horse, or a bird, or a dog, yet consider it a matter of no
importance to whom they entrust the training of their son. Him they
often put in the hands of such teachers as no common citizen with any
sense at all would want in charge of his sons [L 564]. Of what
consequence is it to have begot a son for the throne, unless you
educate him for his rule? Neither is the young prince to be given to
any sort of nurse, but only to those of stainless character, who have
been pre-

---- Footnotes ----

10 Cf. Seneca Ep. Mor. LII; Plutarch Training of Children 7. 11
Cf. Seneca De ira II. 21. 3; Plato Rep. VII. 536. 12 Ep. Mor. LII. 8,
9.

------------------

viously instructed in their duties and are well trained. He should not
be allowed to associate with whatever playmates appear, but only with
those boys of good and modest character; he should be reared and
trained most carefully and as becomes a gentleman./13 That whole crowd
of wantons, hard drinkers, filthy- tongued fellows, especially
flatterers+, must be kept far from his sight and hearing while his
mind is not yet fortified with precepts to the contrary./14 Since the
natures of so many men are inclined towards the ways of evil, there is
no nature so happily born that it cannot be corrupted by wrong
training./15 What do you expect except a great fund of evil in a
prince, who, regardless of his native character (and a long line of
ancestors does not necessarily furnish a mind, as it does a kingdom),
is beset from his very cradle by the most inane opinions; is raised in
the circle of senseless women; grows to boyhood among naughty girls,
abandoned playfellows, and the most abject flatterers+, among buffoons
and mimes, drinkers and gamesters, and worse than stupid and worthless
creators of wanton pleasures. In the company of all of these he hears
nothing, learns nothing, absorbs nothing except pleasures, amusements,
arrogance, haughtiness, greed, petulance, and tyranny - and from this
school he will soon progress to the government of his kingdom! {riot+}
Although each one of all the great arts is very difficult, there is
none finer nor more difficult than that of ruling well. Why in the
case of this one thing alone do we feel the need of no training, but
deem it sufficient to have been born for it? To what end except
tyranny do they devote themselves as men, who as boys played at
nothing except as tyrants?  B.435] It is too much even to hope that
all men will be good, yet

it is not difficult to select from so many thousands one or two,

who are conspicuous for their honesty and wisdom, through whom

many good men may be gained in simple fashion. The real young

prince should hold his youth in dis-

---- Footnotes ----

13 Cf. Plutarch Training of Children 6. 14 Cf. ibid., 17; Seneca De
ira II. 21. 7-8. 15 Cf. Plato Rep. VI. 491; see also ibid., 494; Laws
III. 691. 16 Cf. Plato Laws I. 643; Isocrates To Nicocles 4.

-------------------

righteous it is, the more it is beset with shameful vices, unless
improved by wholesome teachings./21

Those shores which receive the severest pounding of the waves we are
wont to bulwark most carefully. Now there are countless things which
can turn the minds of princes from the true course - great fortune,
worldly wealth in abundance, the pleasures of luxurious extravagance,
freedom to do anything they please, the precedents of great but
foolish princes, the storms and turmoils of human affairs themselves,
and above all else, flattery+, spoken in the guise of faith and
frankness./22 On this account must the prince be the more sincerely
strengthened with the best of principles and the precedents of
praiseworthy princes.

Just as one who poisons the public fountain from which all drink
deserves more than one punishment, so he is the most harmful who
infects the mind of the prince with base ideas, /23 which later
produce the destruction of so many men. If any one counterfeits the
prince's coinage, he is beaten about the head [B 436]; surely he who
corrupts the character of the prince is even more deserving of that
punishment. The teacher should enter at once upon his duties, so as to
implant the seeds of good moral conduct while the senses of the prince
are still in the tenderness of youth, while his mind is furthest
removed from all vices and tractably yields to the hand of guidance in
whatever it directs. He is immature both in body and mind, as in his
sense of duty. The teacher's task is always the same, but he must
employ one method in one case, and another in another. While his pupil
is still a little child, he can bring in his teachings through pretty
stories, pleasing fables, clever parables. When he is bigger, he can
teach the same things directly./24

When the little fellow has listened with pleasure to Aesop's fable/25
of the lion and the mouse or of the dove and the ant,

----- 21 Cf. Plato Rep. VI. 491. 22 Cf. Augustine Civ. Dei
XVII. 20. 23 Cf. Plutarch A Philosopher Is to Converse with Great Men
3. 24 Cf. Plato Rep. VI. 498. 25 Fabulae 256, 296, 7 (ed. C. Halm).

and when he has finished his laugh, then the teacher should point out
the new moral: the first fable teaches the prince to despise no one,
but to seek zealously to win to himself by kindnesses the heart of
even the lowest peasant (plebs), for no one is so weak but that on
occasion he may be a friend to help you, or an enemy to harm you, even
though you be the most powerful. {affable] When he has had his fun out
of the eagle, queen of the birds, that was almost completely done for
by the beetle, the teacher should again point out the meaning: not
even the most powerful prince can afford to provoke or overlook even
the humblest enemy. Often those who can inflict no harm by physical
strength can do much by the machinations of their minds. When he has
learned with pleasure the story of Phaeton+, the teacher should show
that he represents a prince, who while still headstrong with the ardor
of youth, but with no supporting wisdom, seized the reins of
government and turned everything into ruin for himself and the whole
world. {history+} When he has finished the story of the Cyclops who
was blinded by Ulysses, the teacher should say in conclusion that the
prince who has great strength of body, but not of mind, is like
Polyphemus. [L 566] Who has not heard with interest of the government
of the bees and ants?/26 When temptations begin to descend into the
youthful heart of the prince, then his tutor should point out such of
these stories as belong in his education. He should tell him that the
king/27 never flies far away, has wings smaller in proportion to the
size of its body than the others, and that he alone has no sting./27
>From this the tutor should point out that it is the part of a good
prince always to remain within the limits of his realm; his reputation
for clemency should be his special form of praise. The same idea
should be carried on throughout. It is not the province of this
treatise to supply a long list of examples, but merely to point out
the

----- 26 Cf., on bees, Vergil Georgics IV. 67-87, 153-219; Pliny
Natural History XI. 5 (4); and on ants, ibid., 30 (36). 27 Erasmus
follows the majority of the ancients in referring to the queen bee as
the "king." 28 See the references in note 26, above.

theory and the way. If there are any stories that seem too coarse, the
teacher should polish and smooth them over with a winning manner of
speech. The teacher should give his praise in the presence of others,
but only within the limits of truth and proportion. His scoldings
should be administered in private and given in such a way that a
pleasing manner somewhat breaks the severity of his admonition. This
is especially to be done when the prince is a little older. Before all
else the story of Christ must be firmly rooted in the mind of the
prince. He should drink deeply of His teachings, gathered in handy
texts, and then later from those very fountains themselves, whence he
may drink more purely and more effectively. He should be taught that
the teachings of Christ apply to no one more than to the prince.

The great mass of people are swayed by false opinions and are no
different from those in Plato's_cave+,/29 who took the empty shadows
as the real things. It is the part of a good prince to admire none of
the things that the common people consider of great consequence, but
to judge all things on their own merits as "good" or "bad./30 But
nothing is truly "bad" unless joined with base infamy. Nothing is
really "good" unless associated with moral integrity. {Cicero+}

Therefore, the tutor should first see that his pupil loves and honors
virtue+ as the finest quality of all, the most felicitous, the most
fitting a prince; and that he loathes and shuns moral turpitude as the
foulest and most terrible of things. Lest the young prince be
accustomed to regard riches+ as an indispensable necessity, to be
gained by right or wrong, he should learn that those are not true
honors which are commonly acclaimed as such. True honor is that which
follows on virtue and right action of its own will. {Cicero+} The less
affected+ it is, the more it redounds to fame. The low pleasures of
the people are so far beneath a prince, especially a Christian prince,
that they hardly become any man. There is another kind of pleasure
which will endure, genuine and true, all through life. Teach the young

----- 29 Rep. VII. 514-15. 30 Cf. Isocrates To Nicocles 50.

prince that nobility, statues, wax masks, family-trees, all the pomp
of heralds, over which the great mass of people stupidly swell with
pride, are only empty terms unless supported by deeds+ worth
while. The prestige of a prince, his greatness, his majesty, must not
be developed and preserved by fortune's wild display, but by wisdom,
solidarity, and good_deeds+.  Death+ is not to be feared, nor should
we wail when it comes to others, unless it was a foul death./31 The
happiest man is not the one who has lived the longest, but the one who
has made the most of his life. The span of life should be measured not
by years but by our deeds well performed. Length of life has no
bearing on a man's happiness. {Seneca+} It is how well he lived that
counts./32 Surely virtue+is its own reward [B 437]. It is the duty of
a good prince to consider the welfare of his people, even at the cost
of his own life if need be.{onus+} But that prince does not really die
who loses his life in such a cause. All those things which the common
people cherish as delightful, or revere as excellent, or adopt as
useful, are to be measured by just one standard - worth. On the other
hand, whatever things the common people object to as disagreeable, or
despise as lowly, or shun as pernicious, should not be avoided unless
they are bound up with dishonor./33

These principles should be fixed in the mind of the future
prince. They should be impressed in his tender young heart as the most
hallowed laws, les lois les plus sacrees./34 Let him hear many being
praised for these ideas and others reprimanded for diverse ones. Then
he will be accustomed from the start to expect praise as a result of
good things and to abhor

----- 31 In addition to the various passages in the Testament,
cf. also Seneca Ep. Mor. IV. 32 Cf. Seneca Ep. Mor. XCIII. 2-5. 33
Cf. Augustine Civ. Dei V. 14. 34 The reading of the Basle edition here
is leges sanctissimae, OEC@oi dYLV rOL; that of the Leyden edition,
leges sanctissimae @L DXCVITOL. I have followed the reading of the
Basle edition since nowhere else in the Institutio does Erasmus mix a
Greek construction with his Latin as an integral part of the
syntax. The words are always parenthetical, as here, or quoted. I have
not been able to examine the reading of the editio princeps. In
accordance with custom, I have here and throughout the translation
rendered the Greek by French to give the effect of the original.

the ignominy that comes from the opposite. But here some one of those
frumps at the court, more stupid and worthless than any woman you
could name, will interrupt with this: "You are making us a
philosopher, not a prince." "I am making a prince," I answer,
"although you prefer a worthless sot like yourself instead of a real
prince!" You cannot be a prince, if you are not a philosopher; you
will be a tyrant+. There is nothing better than a good prince. A
tyrant+ is such a monstrous beast that his like does not
exist. Nothing is equally baneful, nothing more hateful to
all. {Cicero+} Do not think that Plato/35 rashly advanced the idea,
which was lauded by the most praiseworthy men, that the blessed state
will be that in which the princes are philosophers, or in which the
philosophers seize the principate. I do not mean by philosopher, one
who is learned in the ways of dialectic or physics, {Prospero+} but
one who casts aside the false pseudo-realities and with open mind
seeks and follows the truth./36 To be a philosopher and to be a
Christian is synonymous in fact. {Lipsius+} The only difference is in
the nomenclature.

What is more stupid than to judge a prince onthe following
accomplishments: his ability to dance gracefully, dice expertly, drink
with a gusto, swell with pride, plunder the people with kingly
grandeur, and do all the other things which I am ashamed even to
mention, although there are plenty who are not ashamed to do them? The
common run of princes zealously avoid the dress and manner of living
of the lower_classes+. Just so should the true prince be removed from
the sullied opinions and desires of the common folk. The one thing
which he should consider base, vile, and unbecoming to him is to share
the opinions of the common people who never are interested in anything
worth while. How ridiculous it is for one adorned with gems, gold, the
royal purple, attended by courtiers, possessing all the other marks of
honor, wax images and statues, wealth that clearly is not his, to be
so far superior to all because of them, and yet in the light of real
goodness of spirit to be found inferior to many born from the very
dregs of society./37

----- 35 Rep. V 473; ibid., VI 487, 499. 36 Cf. Plato Rep. VI. 485. 37
Cf. Isocrates To Nicocles 32; see also Xenophon Cyropaedia I. 6. 8.


What else does the prince, who flaunts gems, gold, the royal purple,
and all the other trappings of fortune's+ pomp in the eyes of his
subjects, do but teach them to crave and admire the very sources from
which spring the foulest essence of nearly all crimes that are
punishable by the law of the prince? In others, frugality and simple
neatness may be ascribed to want, or parsimony, if you are less kind
in your judgment. These same qualities in a prince are clearly an
evidence of temperance, since he uses sparingly the unlimited means
which he possesses.

What man is there whom it becomes to stir up crimes and then inflict
punishment for them? What could be more disgusting than for him to
permit himself things he will not let others do? If you want to show
yourself an excellent prince, see that no one outshines you in the
qualities befitting your position - I mean wisdom, magnanimity+,
temperance, integrity./39 If you want to make trial of yourself with
other princes, do not consider yourself superior to them if you take
away part of their power or scatter their forces; but only if you have
been less corrupt than they, less greedy, less arrogant, less
wrathful+, less headstrong./39

No one will gainsay that nobility in its purest form becomes a
prince. There are three kinds of nobility: the first is derived from
virtue and good actions; the second comes from acquaintance with the
best of training; and the third from an array of family portraits and
the genealogy or wealth./40 It by no means becomes a prince to swell
with pride over this lowest degree of nobility, for it is so low that
it is nothing at all, unless it has itself sprung from virtue. Neither
must he neglect the first, which is so far the first that it alone can
be considered in the strictest judgment. If you want to be famous do
not make a display of statues or paintings; if there is anything
praiseworthy in them, it is due to the artist whose genius and work
they represent. Far better to make your character the monument to your
good parts. If all else is lacking, the very

----- 38 Cf. Xenophon Agesilaus X. 1; Cyropaedia VIII. I. 37;
Aristotle Pol. 1. 13. 39 Cf. Plutarch Agesilaus 23. 5; 7. 3. 40
Cf. Seneca Ep. Mor. XLIV. 3-5.

appurtenances of your majesty can remind you of your duty. What does
the anointing mean if not greatness, leniency, and clemency on the
part of the prince, since cruelty is almost always the companion of
great power? What does the gold mean, except outstanding wisdom? What
significance has the sparkle of the gems, except extraordinary virtues
as different as possible from the common run? What does the warm rich
purple purple mean, if not the essence of love for the state? And why
the scepter, unless as a mark of a spirit clinging strongly to
justice, turned aside by none of life's diversions? But if the prince
has none of these qualities [B 438], these symbols are not ornaments
to him, but stand as accusations against him. If a necklace, a
scepter, royal purple robes [L 568], a train of attendants are all
that make a king, what is to prevent the actors who come on the stage
decked with all the pomp of state from being called king? What is it
that distinguishes a real king from the actor? It is the spirit
befitting a prince. I mean he must be like a father to the state./41
It is on this basis that the people swore allegiance to him. The
crown, the scepter, the royal robes, the collar, the sword belt are
all marks or symbols of good qualities in the good prince; in a bad
one, they are accusations of vice.

Watchfulness must increase in proportion to his meanness, or else we
will have a prince like many we read about of old. (May we never see
the like again!) If you strip them of their royal ornaments and
inherited goods, and reduce them to themselves alone, you will find
nothing left except the essence of an expert at dice, the victor of
many a drinking bout, the fierce conqueror of modesty, the craftiest
of deceivers, an insatiable pillager; a creature steeped in perjury,
sacrilege, perfidy, and every other kind of crime. Whenever you think
of yourself as a prince, remember you are a Christian prince! You
should be as different from even the noble pagan princes as a
Christian is from a pagan./42

----- 41 Cf. Cicero Rep. II. 26. 47, among many others, for this
idea. This could not have been directly used as a source, for the
Republic, as Erasmus himself tells us, was lost until after his
day. [but see Off. 357] 42 Cf. Augustine Civ. Dei V. 18.

Do not think that the profession of a Christian is a matter to be
lightly passed over, entailing no responsibilities unless, of course,
you think the sacrament which you accepted along with everything else
at baptism is nothing. And do not think you renounce just for the once
the delights of Satan which bring pain to the Christ. He is displeased
with all that is foreign to the teachings of the Gospel. You share the
Christian sacraments alike with all others - why not its teachings
too? You have allied yourself with Christ - and yet will you slide
back into the ways of Julius and Alexander the Great? You seek the
same reward as the others, yet you will have no concern with His
mandates.

But on the other hand, do not think that Christ is found in
ceremonies, in doctrines kept after a fashion, and in constitutions of
the church. Who is truly Christian? Not he who is baptized or
anointed, or who attends church. It is rather the man who has embraced
Christ in the innermost feelings of his heart, and who emulates Him by
his pious deeds./43 Guard against such inner thoughts as these: "Why
is all this addressed to me? I am not a mere subject. I am not a
priest. I am not a monk." Think rather in this fashion: "I am a
Christian and a prince." It is the part of a true Christian to shun
carefully all vulgarity. It is the province of a prince to surpass all
in stainless character and wisdom. You compel your subjects to know
and obey your laws. With far more energy you should exact of yourself
knowledge and obedience to the laws of Christ, your king!/44 You judge
it an infamous crime, for which there can be no punishment terrible
enough, for one who has sworn allegiance to his king to revolt from
him. On what grounds, then, do you grant yourself pardon and consider
as a matter of sport and jest the countless times you have broken the
laws of Christ, to whom you swore allegiance in your baptism, to whose
cause you pledged yourself, by whose sacraments you are bound and
pledged? If these acts are done in earnest, why do we make a farce of

----- 43 Cf. Plato Laws IV 716. 44 Cf. Plutarch The Banquet 7.

them? If they are only sham, why do we vaunt ourselves under the glory
of Christ as pretext? There is but one death for all - beggars and
kings alike. But the judgment after death is not the same for
all. None are dealt with more severely than the powerful.

Do not think you have acquitted yourself well in the eyes of Christ,
merely because you send a fleet against the Turks, or build a shrine
or erect a little monastery somewhere. There is no better way to gain
the favor of God, than by showing yourself a beneficial prince for
your people. Guard against the deceit of flatterers+ who claim that
precepts of this kind have no concern for princes but pertain only to
that class which they call ecclesiastics. The prince is not a priest,
I confess, and therefore does not consecrate the body of Christ. He is
not a bishop, and so does not rouse the people on the mysteries of
Christianity, nor does he administer the sacrament. He has not
professed the rule of St. Benedict, and therefore does not wear the
cowl. But what is more than all this, he is a Christian. He has
followed the rule of Christ himself. It is from Him that he has
received his white robe, not from St. Francis. The prince should vie
with the other Christians, if he would have the same reward. You, too,
must take up your cross, or else Christ will have none of you. "What,"
you ask, "is my cross?" {onus+} I will tell you: Follow the right, do
violence to no one, plunder no one, sell no public office, be
corrupted by no bribes. To be sure, your treasury will have far less
in it than otherwise, but take no thought for that loss, if only you
have acquired the interest from justice. While you are using every
means and interest to benefit the state, your life is fraught with
care; you rob your youth and genius of their pleasures; you wear
yourself down with long hours of toil. {Henv+} Forget that and enjoy
yourself in the consciousness of right. As you would rather stand for
an injury than avenge it at great loss to the state, perchance you
will lose a little something of your empire. Bear that; consider that
you have gained a great deal because you have brought hurt to fewer
than you would otherwise have done. Do your

private emotions as a man reproachful anger, love for your wife,
hatred of an enemy, shame - urge you to do what is not right and what
is not to the welfare of the state? Let the thought of honor+ win [B
439]. Let the concern for the state completely cover your personal
ambitions. If you cannot defend your realm without violating justice,
without wanton loss of human life, without great loss to religion,
give up and yield to the importunities of the age! If you cannot look
out for the possessions of your subjects without danger to your own
life, set the safety of the people before your very life! But while
you are conducting yourself in this fashion, which befits a true
Christian prince, there will be plenty to call you a dolt, and no
prince at all! Hold fast to your cause. It is far better to be a just
man than an unjust prince. It is clear now, I think, that even the
greatest kings are not without their crosses, if they want to follow
the course of right at all times, as they should.

In the case of private individuals, some concession is granted to
youth and to old age: the former may make a mistake now and then; the
latter is allowed leisure and a cessation of toils. {Henv+} But the
man who undertakes the duties of the prince, while managing the
affairs of everyone, is not free to be either a young man or an old
one; he cannot make a mistake without a great loss to many people; he
cannot slacken in his duties without the gravest disasters
ensuing. The ancients used to say that was a costly prudence which
came from experience, because each one found it at his own expense./45
The prince should be sheltered from this by all means. When such
experiences occur later, they bring great harm to all the people. If
Africanus/46 spoke the truth when he said, "'I did not think,' is not
a fit expression for any wise man," how much more unsuited is it to a
prince! For it applies not only to the great man himself, but, alas,
to the state as well! For example, a war begun in a moment of rashness
by a young prince with no knowledge of war, lasts throughout twenty
years.

----- 45 Cf. Plato Symposium 222. 411 Valerius Maximus VII. 2. 2.

What a vast sea of misfortunes this floods over us! At length when it
is too late, he recovers his senses and says, "I did not think." On
another occasion he followed his own bent, or listened to the
entreaties of others, and appointed corrupt public officials who
overthrew the orderly functioning of the whole state. After a while he
saw his mistake and said, "I did not think." That sort of wisdom is
too expensive for the state, if all else has to be bought at the same
high price. Hence the instruction of the prince in accordance with
established principles and ideas must take precedence over all else so
that he may gain his knowledge from theory and not experience. Long
experience which youth precludes will be supplied by the advice of
older men./47

Do not think you may do anything you please, as foolish women and
flatterers+ are in the habit of telling princes. School yourself so
that nothing pleases you which is not suitable. Remember that what is
proper for private citizens, is not necessarily becoming in you. What
is just a little mistake on the part of anyone else, is a disgrace in
connection with a prince. The more others allow you, the less you
should permit yourself. As others indulge you, so you should check
yourself./48 Even when everyone marks you with approval, be your own
severest critic. Your life is open to all - you cannot hide
yourself. You have either to be a good man for the common good, or a
bad one, bringing general destruction./49 As more honors are heaped
upon you by everyone, you must make a special effort to see that you
deserve them. No fitting honors or gratitude can ever be shown a good
prince; no punishment can be bad enough for an evil prince. There is
nothing in life better than a wise and good monarch; there is no
greater scourge than a foolish or a wicked one. The corruption of an
evil prince spreads more swiftly and widely than the scourge of any
pestilence. In the same proportion a wholesome life on the part of the
prince is, without question, the quickest and shortest way to improve
public morals. The common people

----- 47 Cf. Cicero De off. I. 34. 122. 48 Cf. Plutarch Discourse to
an Unlearned Prince 2. 49 Cf. ibid., 7; Xenophon Cyropaedia
VIII. 7. 23.

imitate nothing with more pleasure than what they see their prince
do./50 Under a gambler, gambling is rife; under a warrior, everyone is
embroiled [L 570]; under an epicure, all disport in wasteful luxury;
under a debauche, license is rampant; under a cruel tyrant+, everyone
brings accusations and false witness. Go through your ancient history
and you will find the life of the prince mirrored in the morals of his
people. {Lear+} No comet, no dreadful power affects the progress of
human affairs as the life of the prince grips and transforms the
morals and character of his subjects./51

The studies and character of priests and bishops are a potent factor
in this matter, I admit, but not nearly so much so as are those of
princes. Men are more ready to decry the clergy if they sin than they
are to emulate them in their good points. So it is that monks who are
really pious do not excite people to follow their example because they
seem only to be practicing what they preach. But on the other hand, if
they are sinful everyone is shocked beyond measure. But there is no
one who is not stimulated to follow in the footsteps of his prince!
For this very reason the prince should take special care not to sin,
because he makes so many followers in his wrongdoings, but rather to
devote himself to being virtuous so that so many more good men may
result.

A beneficent prince, as Plutarch/52 in his great learning said, is a
living likeness of God, who is at once good and powerful. His goodness
makes him want to help all; his power makes him able to do so. On the
other hand, an evil prince, who is like a plague to his country, is
the incarnation of the devil, who has great power joined with his
wickedness. All his resources to the very last, he uses for the
undoing of the human race. Was not each of these, Nero, Caligula,
Heliogabalus, a sort of evil genius in the world? [B 440] They were
plagues to the world during their lives, and their very memory is open
to the curse of all mankind. When you who are a prince, a Christian

----- 50 Cf. Xenophon Agesilaus 7. 2; Cyropaedia VIII. I. 21 ;
Isocrates To Nicocles 31; Cicero Rep. II. 42. 69. 51 Cf. Cicero Laws
III. 14. 31. 52 Discourse to an Unlearned Prince 3.

prince, hear and read that you are the likeness of God and his vicar,
do not swell with pride on this account, but rather take pains that
you correspond to your wonderful archetype, whom it is hard, but not
unseemly, to follow./53

Christian theology attributes three prime qualities to God the highest
power, the greatest wisdom, the greatest goodness. In so far as you
can you should make this trinity yours. Power without goodness is
unmitigated tyranny; without wisdom it brings chaos, not
domain.{Lear+} In the first place, then, in so much as fortune+ gave
you power, make it your duty to gain for yourself the best store of
wisdom possible, so you may clearly see the objectives to be striven
for and the courses to avoid. In the next place, try to fill as many
needs as possible for everyone, for that is the province of
goodness. Make your power serve you to this end, that you can be of as
much assistance as you want to be. But no, your desire in this respect
should always exceed your means! On the other hand, always cause less
hurt than you could have caused.

God is loved by all good men. Only the wicked fear Him, and even they
have only that fear which all men have of harm befalling them. In like
manner, a good prince should strike awe into the heart of none but the
evildoers and criminals; and yet even to them he should hold out a
hope of leniency, if only they reform. On the other hand, his Satanic
majesty is beloved of no one, and is feared by all, especially the
virtuous, for the wicked are his appropriate attendants. Likewise
atyrant+ is hated by every good man, and none are closer to him than
the worst element in society. This was clearly seen by St. Denis,/54
who divided the world into three hierarchies: what God is in the
heavenly concourse, that should the bishop be in the church, and the
prince in the state. He is supreme, and from him flows the fountain of
all his goodness. No condition can be more absurd than that in which
the greatest portion of all the state's misfortunes arise from him who
should be the fountainhead of goodness. The common people are

----- 53 Cf., inter alios, Ambrosiaster (Pseudo-Augustine)
Quaest. Vet. et Novi Test. XCI. 8; XXXV. 54 De ecciesiactica
hierarchia V. 2.

unruly by nature, and magistrates are easily corrupted through avarice
or ambition. There is just one blessed stay in this tide of evils -
the unsullied character of the prince. If he, too, is overcome by
foolish ideas and base desires, what last ray of hope is there for the
state?

As God is good in all his beneficence and does not need the attendant
services of anyone nor ask any recompense, so it should be with the
prince who is really great - who is the likeness of the Eternal
Prince. He should freely do works of kindness for everyone without
thought of compensation or glory. God placed a beautiful likeness of
Himself in the heavens - the sun. Among mortal men he set up a
tangible and living image of himself - the king./55 The sun is freely
shared by all and imparts its light to the rest of the heavenly
bodies. The prince should be readily accessible {affability+} for all
the needs of his people. He should be a virgin source of wisdom in
himself, so that he may never become benighted, however blind everyone
else may be.

God is swayed by no emotions, yet he rules the universe with supreme
judgment. The prince should follow His example in all his actions,
cast aside all personal motives, and use only reason and judgment. God
is sublime. The prince should be removed as far as possible from the
low concerns of the common people and their sordid desires.

No one sees God in his government of the universe, but only feels Him
and His kindness. The prince's native land should not feel his powers,
except when its troubles are mitigated through his wisdom and
goodness. On the other hand, tyrants+ are nowhere experienced, except
to the sorrow of all. When the sun is highest in the zodiac, then its
motion is slowest: so it is with you, the prince. The higher you are
carried by fortune, the more lenient and less stern you should be./56
Loftiness of spirit is not shown by the fact that you will tolerate no

----- 55 Cf. Plutarch Discourse to an Unlearned Prince 3. The
unusually close Similarity of this passage to that of Erasmus is
striking, but Erasmus does not mention Plutarch here. Since Erasmus
edited some of Plutarch's works, includ-ing this essay, the
indebtedness can hardly be doubted. 56 Cf. Plutarch, loc. cit., 6.

affronts, that you allow no one greater empire than your own, but
rather that you consider it improper to admit of anything unbecoming a
prince.

All slavery is pitiable and dishonorable, but the lowest and most
wretched form is slavery to vice and degrading passions. {Caliban+}
What more abject and disgraceful condition can there be than that in
which the prince, who holds imperial authority over free men, is
himself a slave to lust, irascibility, avarice, ambition, {viceslist+}
and all the rest of that malicious category?/57 It is an established
fact that among the pagans there were some who preferred death for
themselves to defending the empire with great waste of human life -
men who set the welfare of the state above their own lives./58 What an
outrageous condition it is, then, for a Christian prince to be
concerned with his pleasures and vicious passions in a period of great
calamity to the state? When you assume the principate, do not think
how much honor is bestowed upon you, but consider rather the great
burden of care you have assumed. {onus+} Do not expend only your
wealth and income but also a good deal of thought. Do not think that
you have plundered a ship but rather that you have taken the wheel. [B
441] According to Plato,/59 no one is fit to rule who has not assumed
the rule unwillingly and only after persuasion. For whoever strives
after the princely place must of necessity either be a fool or else
not realize how fraught with care and trial the kingly office really
is, or he may be so wicked a man that he plans to use the royal power
for his own benefit, not for that of the state, or so negligent that
he does not carry out the task he assumed. To be a fit ruler, the
prince should at the same time be diligent, good, and wise. The
greater your dominion, the greater care you must exercise to keep down
your conceit. Remember that you are thereby shouldering greater cares
and responsibilities and that you are bound to give less and less to
your leisure and pleasures. Only

----- 57 Cf. Augustine Civ. Dei. XIX. 15; see also ibid., IV. 3. 58
Cf. Augustine Civ. Dei. XVIII. 19. Cicero De Off. III. 27. 100. 59
Rep. I. 347, see also ibid., VII. 520; Cicero Rep. I. 17. 27;
Augustine Civ. Dei XIX. 19.

those who govern the state not for themselves but for the good of the
state itself, deserve the title "prince." His titles mean nothing in
the case of one who rules to suit himself and measures everything to
his own convenience: he is no prince, but a tyrant. There is no more
honorable title than "prince," and there is no term more detested and
accursed than"tyrant+." There is the same difference between a prince
and a tyrant as there is between a conscientious father and a cruel
master./60 The former is ready and willing to give even his life for
his children; the latter thinks of nothing else than his own gain, or
indulges his caprices to his own taste, with no thought to the welfare
of his subjects. Do not be satisfied just because you are called
"king" or "prince." Those scourges of the earth, Phalaris and
Dionysius, had those titles. Pass your own judgment on yourself [L
572]. Seneca/91 was right, the distinction between tyrant and king is
one of fact, not of terminology.

To summarize: In his Politics Aristotle/61 differentiates between a
prince and a tyrant on the basis that the one is interested in his own
pursuits and the other is concerned for the state. No matter what the
prince is deliberating about, he always keeps this one thing in mind:
"Is this to the advantage of all my subjects?" A tyrant only considers
whether a thing will contribute to his cause. A prince is vitally
concerned with the needs of his subjects, even while engaged in
personal matters. On the other hand, if a tyrant ever chances to do
something good for his subjects, he turns that to his own personal
gain. Those who look out for their people only in so far as it
redounds to their personal advantage, hold their subjects in the same
status as the average man considers his horse or ass. For these men
take care of their animals, but all the care they give them is judged
from the advantage to themselves, not to the animals. But anyone who
despoils the people with his rapacity, or wracks them with his
cruelty, or subjects them to all sorts of perils to satisfy his
ambition, considers free

----- 60 Cf. Xenophon Cyropaedia VIII. i. i ; Seneca De clementia
I. 14 2. 61 De clementia 1. 13. 1. 62 Pol. IV. 1O.

citizens even cheaper than the common folk value their draft animals
or the fencing master his slaves.

The prince's tutor shall see that a hatred of the very words "tyranny"
and "dominion" are implanted in the prince. He shall often utter
diatribes against those names, accursed to the whole human race -
Phalaris, Mezentius, Dionysius of Syracuse, Nero, Caligula, and
Domitian who wanted to be called "God and Lord."/63 On the other hand,
if he finds any examples of good princes who are as different as
possible from the tyrant he should zealously bring them forth with
frequent praise and commendation. Then let him create the picture of
each, and impress upon mind and eye, to the extent of his
capabilities, the king and the tyrant, so that the prince may burn to
emulate the one and detest the latter even more [than before].

Let the teacher paint a sort of celestial creature, more like to a
divine being than a mortal: complete in all the virtues; born for the
common good; yea, sent by the God above to help the affairs of mortals
by looking out and caring for everyone and everything; to whom no
concern is of longer standing or more dear than the state; who has
more than a paternal spirit toward everyone; who holds the life of
each individual dearer than his own; who works and strives night and
day for just one end - to be the best he can for everyone; with whom
rewards are ready for all good men and pardon for the wicked, if only
they will reform - for so much does he want to be of real help to his
people, without thought of recompense, that if necessary he would not
hesitate to look out for their welfare at great risk to himself; who
considers his wealth to lie in the advantages of his country; who is
ever on the watch so that everyone else may sleep deeply; who grants
no leisure to himself so that he may spend his life in the peace of
his country; who worries himself with continual cares so that

68 Cf. on Phalaris, e.g., Plutarch A Philosopher Is to Converse with
Great Men 3; Aristotle Pol. V. 10; Seneca De ira II. 5; on Dionysius,
e.g., Plutarch loc. cit., and Dion 7; Aristotle loc. cit.; on Nero,
Caligula, and Domitian, e.g., see Suetonius Lives of the Caesars; on
Domitian in particular, Suetonius Dom. 13.

his subjects may have peace and quiet./64 Upon the moral qualities of
this one man alone depends the felicity of the state. Let the tutor
point this out as the picture of a true prince!

Now let him bring out the opposite side by showing a frightful,
loathsome beast, formed of a dragon, wolf, lion, viper, bear, and like
creatures;/65 with six hundred eyes all over it, teeth everywhere,
fearful from all angles, and with hooked claws; with never satiated
hunger, fattened on human vitals, and reeking with human blood; never
sleeping, but always threatening the fortunes and lives of all men;
dangerous to everyone, especially to the good; a sort of fatal scourge
to the whole world, on which everyone who has the interests of state
at heart pours forth execration and hatred; which cannot be borne
because of its monstrousness and yet cannot be overthrown without
great disaster to the city because its maliciousness is hedged about
with armed forces and wealth [B 442]. This is the picture of a tyrant+
- unless there is something more odious which can be
depicted. Monsters of this sort were Claudius and Caligula. The myths
in the poets also showed Busyris, Pentheus, and Midas, whose names are
now objects of hate to all the human race, to be of the same type.

The main object of a tyrant is to follow his own caprices, but a king
follows the path of right and honor. Reward to a tyrant is wealth; to
a king, honor, which follows upon virtue./66 The tyrants' rule is
marked by fear, deceit, and machinations of evil. The king governs
through wisdom, integrity, and beneficence./67 The tyrant uses his
imperial power for himself; the king, for the state. The tyrant
guarantees safety for himself by means of foreign attendants and hired
brigands. The king deems himself safe through his kindness to his
subjects and their love for him in return./68 Those citizens who are
distinguished for their moral character, judgment, and prestige are
held under suspicion and distrust by the tyrant./69 The king,

----- 64 Cf. Augustine Civ. Dei. V. 24; see also Seneca De Clementia
I. 15. 4, 5. 65 The Latin is monstra, "monsters." 66 Cf. Aristotle
Pol. V. 10. 67 Cf. Plutarch Discourse to ax Unlearned Prince 4. 68
Cf. Seneca De clementia 1. 13. i. 69 Cf. Plato Rep. VIII. 567;
Aristotle Pol. V. 10.

however, cleaves to these same men as his helpers and friends. The
tyrant is pleased either with stupid dolts, on whom he imposes; or
with wicked men, whom he puts to evil use in defending his position as
tyrant; or withflatterers+, from whom he hears only praise which he
enjoys. It is just the opposite with a king; every wise man by whose
counsel he can be helped is very dear to him. The better each man is,
the higher he rates him, because he can rely on his allegiance. He
loves honest friends, {Kent+} by whose companionship he is
bettered. Kings and tyrants have many hands and many eyes, but they
are very different./71 A tyrant's aim is to get the wealth of his
subjects in the hands of a few, and those the wickedest, and fortify
his power by the weakened strength of his subjects. The king considers
that his purse is represented by the wealth of his subjects; the
tyrant strives to have everyone answerable to him either by law or
informers. The king rejoices in the freedom of his people; the tyrant
strives to be feared, the king to be loved. {love_fear+} The tyrant
looks upon nothing with greater suspicion than the harmonious
agreement of good men and of cities; good princes especially rejoice
in this. A tyrant is happy to stir up factions and strife between his
subjects and feeds and aids chance animosities. This means he basely
uses for the safeguarding of his tyranny. A king has this one
interest: to foster peaceful relations between his subjects and
straightway to adjust such dissensions among them as chance to arise,
for he believes that they are the worst menace to the state that can
happen. When a tyrant sees that affairs of state are flourishing, he
trumps up some pretext, or even invites in some enemy, so as to start
a war and thereby weaken the powers./71 The opposite is true of a
king. He does of his own people. everything and allows everything that
will bring everlasting peace to his country, for he realizes that war
is the source of all misfortunes to the state. The tyrant either sets
up laws, constitutions, edicts, treaties, and all things sacred and
profane to his own personal preservation or else perverts them to that

------ 70 Xenophon Cyropaedia VIII. 2. 10. 71 Cf. Plato
Rep. VIII. 567.

end. The king judges everything by the standard of its value to the
state. Most of the marks or schemes of a tyrant have been set forth at
great length by Aristotle/72 in his Politics; but he sums them up
under three points. The tyrant is first concerned to see that his
subjects neither wish to nor dare to rise against his tyrannical rule;
next, that they do not trust one another; and thirdly, that they
cannot attempt a revolution. He accomplishes his first end by allowing
his subjects to develop no spirit at all and no wisdom, by keeping
them like slaves and devoted to mean stations in life, or held
accountable by a system of spies, or rendered effeminate+ through
pleasure. He knows full well that noble and acute spirits do not
tolerate a tyranny with good grace. He accomplishes his second point
by stirring up dissension and mutual hatred among his subjects so that
one accuses the other and he himself is more powerful as a result of
their misfortunes. The third he attains by using every means to reduce
the wealth and prestige of any of his subjects, and especially the
good men, to a limit which no sane man would want to approach and
would dispair of attaining.

A prince should keep as far as possible from all such ideas, yes, tout
au contraire/73 i.e., be clearly separated from them and this is
especially true of a Christian prince. If Aristotle, who was a pagan
and a philosopher too, painted such a picture among men who were not
holy and learned in the Scriptures, how much more is it fit for one
who moves in the place of Christ to fulfill the task?

Even in the dumb animals we may find comparisons to both king and
tyrant. The king bee/74 has the biggest quarters, but in the middle of
the hive, which is the safest place. He is relieved of all physical
work, but is the overseer of the work of the others. If he is lost,
the whole swarm will break up. Besides, the king is distinguished in
form from the others, both as to size and shiny appearance. But
according to Seneca/75

----- 72 Pol. V. 11. 73 The text reads ix bLat&i-coov. 74 Erasmus
again follows the erroneous practice of the ancients in referring to
the queen bee as the "king bee." 75 De clementia 1. 19. 2, 3.

this is the most outstanding difference, that although bees rise to
such a pitch of anger that they leave their stings in the wound, yet
the king alone has no sting. Nature did not want him to be cruel and
seek vengeance appropriate to a great personage, and so she withheld
his weapon and left his wrath ineffectual. This should be a great
pattern for mighty kings. [L 574] If you want a comparison for the
tyrant, take the lion, bear, wolf, or eagle, all of which live on
their mangled prey. Since they know they are open to the hatred of
everyone and are beset with ambuscades all around them, they dwell on
rugged cliffs, or hide away in caverns and desolate regions - unless
perchance the tyrant exceeds the savageness even of these beasts. [B
443] Huge snakes, panthers, lions, and all the other beasts that are
condemned on the charge of savageness do not rage one against the
other, but beasts of like characteristics are safe together. But the
tyrant, who is a man, turns his bestial cruelty against his fellow men
and fellow citizens. In the Holy Scriptures/76 God described the
tyrant in these words:

This will be the manner of the king that shall reign over you: He will
take your sons, and appoint them for himself, for his chariots, and to
be his horsemen; and some shall run before his chariots. And he will
appoint him captains over thousands, and captains over fifties; and
will set them to ear his ground, and to reap his harvest, and to make
his instruments of war, and instruments of his chariots. And he will
take your daughters to be confectioneries, and to be cooks, and to be
bakers. And he will take your fields, and your vineyards, and your
oliveyards, even the best of them, and give them to his servants. And
he will take the tenth of your seed, and of your vineyards, and give
to his officers, and to his servants. And he will take your
menservants, and your maidservants, and your goodliest young men, and
your asses, and put them to his work. He will take the tenth of your
sheep: and ye shall be his servants. And ye shall cry out in that day
because of your king which ye shall have chosen you; and the Lord will
not hear you in that day.

And do not be exercised because he calls him "king" instead of
"tyrant," for of old the title of "king" was as hateful as that of
"tyrant." And since there is no greater benefit than a good king, why
did God in his anger order this image to be set

----- 761 Sam. 8:11-18.

up before the people, by which he might deter them from seeking a
king? He said the power of kings (ius regium) was the power of tyrants
(ius tyrannicum). Yet Samuel had been a good king and governed his
people's affairs justly and honestly for many years; but they did not
realize their happiness, and, as is the way of people, begged their
king to rule with arrogance and violence. And yet in this image what a
large part consists of the evils which within our memory we have
discovered even in some Christian princes, to the great misfortune of
the whole world!

Now we come to the description of a good prince, which God himself
gives in the book of Deuteronomy./77 When a king is established over
you,

he shall not multiply horses to himself, nor cause the people to
return to Egypt, to the end that he should multiply horses:
. . . Neither shall he multiply wives to himself, that his heart turn
not away: neither shall he greatly multiply to himself silver and
gold. And it shall be when he sitteth upon the throne of his kingdom,
that he shall write him a copy of this law in a book out of that which
is before the priests the Levites: And it shall be with him, and he
shall read therein all the days of his life: that he may learn to fear
the Lord his God, to keep all the words of this law and these
statutes, to do them: That his heart be not lifted up above his
brethren, and that he turn not aside from the commandment, to the
right hand, or to the left: to the end that he may prolong his days in
his kingdom, he, and his children, in the midst of Israel.

If a Hebrew king is bidden to learn the law, which gave but the merest
shadowy outlines of justice, how much more is it fitting for a
Christian prince to follow steadfastly the teachings of the Gospels?
If He does not wish the king of Judea to be exalted over his people,
but wishes to call them brothers instead of slaves, how much less does
it become a Christian [prince] to call them slaves whom Christ
himself, the Prince of princes, called brothers?

Now this is what Ezekiel/78 says of a tyrant: "[Her] princes in the
midst thereof are like wolves ravening the prey, to shed blood."
Plato/79 calls princes the guardians of the state, in that they may be
for their country what dogs are for the

----- 77 17:i6-20. 78 22:27. 79 Rep. Ill. 416.  flocks; but if the
dogs should be turned into wolves what hope would there be for the
flocks. Again, in another place/80 he calls a cruel and rapacious
prince a "lion," and in still another/81 he inveighs against shepherds
who are taking good care of themselves, instead of giving attention to
their flocks, and believes that they are like princes who use their
power for themselves alone. {onus+} And in reference to Nero, Paul/82
said, "I was delivered out of the mouth of the lion." Now see how
Solomon,/83 in his wisdom, pictured a tyrant with almost the same idea
in mind: "As a roaring lion, and a ranging bear, so is a wicked ruler
over the poor people." And in another passage he says, "When the
wicked beareth rule, the people mourn" as if surrendered to
slavery. In still another, "When the wicked rise, men hide
themselves." There is another in "Isaiah,"/84 according to which the
Lord is angry at the misdeeds of the people and threatens them,
saying, "And I will give children to be their princes, and babes shall
rule over them." Can this mean, anything else than that no more dire
calamity can befall a country than a stupid and impious prince?

But why go on with all this? Christ himself, who is the one Prince and
Lord of all, has most clearly set off the Christian prince from the
pagan, saying,/85 "The princes of the Gentiles exercise dominion over
them, and they that are great exercise authority upon them. But it
shall not be so among you." If it is the part of pagan princes to
exercise dominion, it does not then become Christian princes. But what
is the meaning of this phrase "but it shall not be so among you,"
unless that the same thing is not proper for Christians, with whom the
principate is [only a matter of] administration, not imperial power,
and kingly authority is [a matter of] service, not tyranny./86 And no
prince should ease his conscience by saying, "These things are for the
bishops, not for me!" They surely are for you - if you are really a
Christian. If you are not, nothing pertains to you! And do not get
excited if perchance you find

----- 8O Ibid., IX 588. 81 Ibid., I. 345. 82 II Tim. 4:17. 83
Prov. 29:15; 29:2; 28:28. 84 3:4. 85 Matt. 20:25-26. 86 Augustine
Civ. Dei. V. 12.

some bishops that have fallen far from this standard. Let them see to
what they are doing. Give your attention to what is becoming in
yourself. [B 444] Do not consider yourself a good prince, just because
you appear less wicked by comparison with others. And do not think it
is correct to do a thing, just because the great run of princes do
it. Hold yourself of your own accord to a rule of honor and judge
yourself according to it./87 Even if there be no one for you to
surpass, strive against yourself, for surely there is no emulation
more honorable or truly worthy of an unconquered prince than a daily
effort to be better. If the name, or better, the principles, of a
tyrant are repulsive, they will not become more honorable if they are
made common to many. If virtue depends on worldly condition, then it
does not depend on [the qualities of individual] men. Seneca+ has
expounded impressively that kings who have the inclination of brigands
and pirates should be put in the same class with them. For it is the
character, not the title, that marks the king.

In his Politics Aristotle/88 tells us that in some oligarchies it was
customary for the magistrates-elect to take the following oath, "I
will persecute the common people with hatred and will strive with all
my power to bring trouble upon them." A prince about to assume his
functions takes quite a different oath before his subjects. And yet we
hear of some who have acted toward the people as if sworn by the old
oath of the barbarians to be the open enemy of the affairs of the
people in every way. Surely this savors of tyranny: the best thing for
the prince, is the worst thing for the people; the good fortune of the
one springs from the misfortunes of the other - just as if a
paterfamilias ran his affairs so that he would become richer and more
powerful through the ill fortunes of his family. Whoever wants to
claim the title "prince" for himself and to shun the hated name
"tyrant," ought to claim it for himself, not through deeds of horror
and threats, but by acts of kindness. For it is of no significance if
he is called "prince" and

----- 87 Ibid. 88 Pol. V. 9.

"father of his Country" by flatterers+ and the oppressed, when he is a
tyrant in fact. And even if his own age fawns upon him, posterity will
not. You can see with what colossal disgust succeeding generations
treated the wicked deeds of those once awe-inspiring kings, whom no
one dared offend by even a word during their lifetime, and how openly
their very names were abominated. The good prince ought to have the
same attitude toward his subjects, as a good paterfamilias toward his
household - for what else is a kingdom but a great family? What is the
king if not the father+ to a great multitude? He is superior, but yet
of the same stock - a man ruling man, a freeman over free men, not
untamed beasts, as Aristotle justly comments,/89 and this is what
those poets" of remotest antiquity meant when they applied to Jupiter
- to whom they assign supreme authority of the whole world and the
gods, as they say -these words, pere des hommes et des dieux," that
is, "father of gods and men." We have been taught by Christ our
teacher that God is the unquestioned prince of all the world, and we
call Him "Father." But what is more revolting or accursed than that
appellation in Homer,/92 monstre devorant ses sujets [i.e., the
devourer of his people],/93 which Achilles, [L 576] I think it is,
applied to the prince who ruled for his own benefit, not for that of
his subjects, for in his wrath he could find no more fitting epithet
for him whom he considered unfit for rule than "man-eater." But Homer,
in giving a man the honorary title of "king," calls him the pasteur de
peuple,"94 "shepherd of the people."/95 There is a very great
difference between a shepherd and a robber. On what apparent ground,
then, do they take the title "prince" to themselves, who choose just a
few of their subjects (and those only the most wicked) through whom by
trickery, trumped-up pretexts, and suddenly-created titles, they sap
the strength of the people and drain their wealth away at the same
time?

----- 89 Pol. I. 5. 90 Homer Iliad XV. 47. 91 The original reads naT@Q
eLv8QCovTF OECo-nc. 92 Ibid., 1. 231. 93 The original reads
81111006QOg Oa(ILXE6g. 94 The original reads notitav XcLCov. 95 Ibid.,
I. 263.

What they have unmercifully extorted they transfer to their privy
purse, or squander shamefully on pleasures, or spend in cruel
wars. Each one that can appear as the cleverest knave in these
matters, considers it of prime importance, just as if the prince were
the enemy of the people, not the father, with the result that he
especially seems to have the prince's concern at heart who bends every
effort to thwart the prosperity of the people. As a paterfamilias
thinks whatever increase of wealth has fallen to any of his house is
[the same as if it had been] added to his own private goods, so he who
has the true attitude of a prince considers the possessions of his
subjects to represent his own wealth. Them he holds bound over to him
through love, so that they have nothing to fear at all from the prince
for either their lives or their possessions.

It will be worth our while to see how Julius Pollux,/96 who had been
the boyhood tutor of Commodus, described to him the king and the
tyrant. He at once ranked the king next to the gods, as being nearest
and most like them. [B 445] Then he said:

Praise the king with these terms: [call him] "Father," {virtue list+}
mild, peaceful, lenient, foresighted, just, humane, magnanimous,
frank. Say that he is no money-grabber nor a slave to his passions;
that he controls himself and his pleasures; that he is rational, has
keen judgment, is clear thinking and circumspect; that he is sound in
his advice, just, sensible, mindful of religious matters, with a
thought to the affairs of men; that he is reliable, steadfast,
infallible, planning great things, endowed with influential judgment;
that he works hard, accomplishes much, is deeply concerned for those
over whom he rules and is their protector; that he is given to acts of
kindness and slowly moved to vengeance; that he is true, constant,
unbending, prone to the side of justice, ever attentive to remarks
about the prince; that he is a check-and-balance on conduct; that he
is readily accessible, affable+ in a gathering, agreeable to any who
want to speak with him, charming, and open- countenanced; that he
concerns himself for those subject to his rule and is fond of his
soldiers; {Henv+} that he wages war with force and vigor, but does not
seek opportunities for it; that he loves peace, tries to arrange
peace, and holds steadily to it; that he is opposed to changing
forcibly the ways of his people; that he knows how to be a leader and
a prince and to establish beneficial laws; that he is born to attain
honors and has the appearance of a god. There

----- 96 Onomasticon I. 40-42.

are in addition many things which could be set forth in an address,
but cannot be expressed in just a word or two./97 This has all been
the thought of Pollux. If a pagan teacher developed such a pagan
prince, [think] how much more venerable should be the likeness set up
of a Christian prince!

Now see in what colors he painted the tyrant.

A wicked prince you will censure with the following epithets:
{viceslist+} tyrant, cruel, savage, violent, property-snatcher,
miserly (as Plato says),/98 one greedy for plunder, man-eater (as
Homer says),/99 arrogant, proud, exclusive, unsocial, difficult of
approach, unpleasant to speak to, hot tempered, irritable, frightful,
raging, slave-to-passion, intemperate, immoderate, inconsiderate,
inhuman, unjust, regardless of counsel, unfair, wicked, brainless,
carefree, fickle, easily taken in, disagreeable, fierce, moody,
incorrigible, abusive, instigator of wars, severe, a scourge,
untractable, intolerable./100 {Lear+}

Since God is the very opposite of a tyrant, so it must follow
unfailingly that there is nothing more loathsome to Him than a baneful
king. Since no-wild beast is more deadly than a tyrant, it
consistently follows that there is nothing more odious to all mankind
than a wicked prince. But who would want to live hated and accursed by
gods and men alike? When the Emperor Augustus realized that there were
many conspiracies against his life and that as soon as one was put
down another straightway sprang up, he said it was not worth while to
live if you were a bane to everyone and your personal safety was
preserved only at the great cost of life among your subjects./101
Furthermore, the kingdom is not only more peaceful and pleasant but
will steadfastly endure for a longer time.

----- 97 Erasmus gives this passage, a direct quotation, in the
original Greek. At the end of it he says, "Although the Latin language
cannot render these phrases handsomely because of the peculiar quality
of Greek, yet we will at least turn them into something which can be
understood," and then he repeats the thought verbatim in Latin. It
seemed to me far better to risk the charge of inconsistency by not
turning this and the following quotation into French, as has been done
with all other Greek passages, than to incur that of pedantry by doing
so. 98 Xenophon Memorabilia 1. 2. 5. 99 Iliad I. 231. 100 Erasmus
likewise gives this direct quotation in the Greek and repeats it
verbatim in Latin with the introductory comment, "Of which words the
following is approximately the thought." 191 Cf. Seneca De clementia
I. 9. 5.

For this we find ample proof in the annals of the ancients. No tyranny
is so firmly protected that it will endure for long. Every state that
has degenerated into a tyranny has rushed on into utter
dissolution. It is meet for him who is feared by all, to fear many;
... and he cannot be safe, whom the majority of men want
removed. {Off+ II.23}

In ancient times, those who ruled their empires well were decreed
divine honors. Toward tyrants the ancients had the same law which we
now apply to wolves and bears - the "reward" comes from the people who
have had the enemy in their very midst. In very early times, the kings
were selected through the choice of the people because of their
outstanding qualities, which were called "heroic" as being all but
divine and superhuman. Princes should remember their beginnings, and
realize that they are not really princes if they lack that quality
which first made princes./103 ` Although there are many types of
state, it is the consensus of nearly all wise-thinking men that the
best form is monarchy. This is according to the example of God that
the sum of all things be placed in one individual but in such a way
that, following God's example, he surpasses all others in his wisdom
and goodness and, wanting nothing, may desire only to help his
state. [B 446] But if conditions were otherwise, that would be the
worst form of state. Whosoever would fight it then would be the best
man. If a prince be found who is complete in all good qualities, then
pure and absolute monarchy is the thing. (If that could only be! I
fear it is too great a thing even to hope for.) If an average prince
(as the affairs of men go now) is found, it will be better to have a
limited monarchy checked and lessened by aristocracy and
democracy. Then there is no chance for tyranny to creep in, but just
as the elements balance each other, so will the state hold together
under similar control. If a prince has the interests of the state at
heart, his power is not checked on this account, so it will be
adjudged, but rather helped. If his atti-

----- 102 Cf. Seneca De ira II. I. 3. 103 Cf. Cicero De
off. II. 12. 42; see also Aristotle Pol. III. 17; VII. 3.

tude is otherwise, however, it is expedient that the state break and
turn aside the violence of a single man./104

Although there are many types of authority (man over beasts, master
over slaves, father over children, husband over wife), yet
Aristotle/105 believes that the rule of the king is finest of all and
calls it especially favored of the gods because it seems to possess a
certain something which is greater than mortal. But if it is divine to
play the part of king, then nothing more suits the tyrant than to
follow the ways of him who is most unlike God. A slave should be
judged for his worth in comparison with a fellow slave, as the
proverb/106 says, a master with a master, one art with another art,
one performance of duty with another. [L 578] But a prince should
excel in every kind of wisdom. That is the theory behind good
government. It is the part of the master to order, of the servant to
obey. The tyrant directs whatever suits his pleasure; the prince only
what he thinks is best for the state. But how can anyone who does not
know what is best direct it [to be done]? Or even worse, if he
considers the wickedest things the most desirable, being utterly
misled by his ignorance or personal feelings? As it is the function of
the eye to see,of the ears to hear, of the nose to smell, so it is the
part of the prince to look out for the affairs of his people. But
there is only one means of deliberating on a question, and that is
wisdom. If the prince lacks that, he can no more be of material
assistance to the state than an eye can see when sight is
destroyed./107

Xenophon,/108 in his book called Oeconomicus, said that it is a divine
rather than a human position to rule over free men at their own
consent, but it is dishonorable to rule over dumb creatures, or slaves
that are under compulsion. But man is a divinely-inspired animal, and
free twice over: once by nature and again by his laws. {justice+} It
is the mark of the highest capacity and clearly of God's inspiration
for a king to control his authority in such a way that his people feel
only the benefits, not

----- 104 Cf. Plato Laws IV. 709; see also Aristotle Pol. IV. 1; Plato
Rep. IX. 580; Isocrates To Nicocles 26; Cicero Rep. I. 35, 54; II. 23,
43. 105 Pol. IV. 2. 106 Aristotle Pol. I. 7. 107 Cf. Plato
Rep. VI. 484, 506-7. 108 xxi. 12.

their subservient condition. Be careful not to consider as yours only
those men whose services you employ in your cookshops, in your
hunting, and in your domestic services, for very often no men are less
yours, but consider all your subjects yours without distinction. If
you single out any one at all, take a man of sterling qualities,
patriotic and devoted to the state, as your nearest and closest
associate. When you travel through the cities of your people, do not
harbor such thoughts as these in your mind: "I am the master of these
great possessions. All these places are subject to my will. I may do
as I please here." But if you want to give some thought [to the
occasion], as a good prince should, do so along these lines:
"Everything has been placed in my trust; therefore, I must unceasingly
strive to hand it over better than I received it." When you look upon
the countless throng of your subjects, be careful not to think of them
as so many slaves. Hold rather this thought: "These thousands of souls
depend on my sincerity alone; they have entrusted themselves and the
protection of all their worldly goods to me alone; they look upon me
as a father. I can do good to these great numbers if I prove myself a
good prince. I will bring harm upon even more if I am a bad prince. I
must certainly exercise great care not to be unjust, lest I bring
tribulation upon such vast numbers." Never forget that "dominion,"
"imperial authority," "kingdom," "majesty," "power" are all pagan
terms, not Christian. The ruling power of a Christian state consists
only of administration, kindness, and protection. But if these words
were to your liking, remember this idea also, which was known and
handed down by the pagan philosophers, that the rule of a prince over
his people is no different from that of the mind over the body. The
mind dominates the body because it knows more than the physical body,
but it does so to the great advantage of the latter rather than to
itself./109 The blessed fortune+ of the physical form is this rule of
the mind. What the heart is in the body of a living creature,

----- 109 Cf. Aristotle Pol. I. 5; Plato Rep. IV. 441; Seneca De
clementia I. 3. 5; Augustine Civ. Dei. IX. 9.

that the prince is in the state. If the heart is sound, it imparts
life to the whole body, since it is the fountain of the blood and life
spirit; but if it has been infected, it brings utter collapse to every
part of the body. The heart is the last part of a living body to be
broken down, and the very last traces of life are thought to survive
in it. Consequently the prince should keep himself clean and undefiled
from all corrupting folly whenever any such disease lays hold of the
people. In a man it is the finely organized part (namely, the mind)
that exercises the control. Likewise, in the mind it is its finest
element, reason+, that asserts itself. And God, who rules the
universe, is the very essence of all things. Therefore, whosoever
assumes the functions of rule in a state, as in a sort of great body,
should excel all others in goodness, wisdom, and watchfulness. The
prince should be superior to his officers in the same degree that they
are to the common people. [B 447] If there is any evil in the mind it
springs from infection, and contact with the body, which is subject to
the passions. Any good that the body possesses is drawn from the mind
as from a fountain. How unbelievable it would be and how contrary to
nature, if ills should spread from the mind down into the body, and
the health of the body be corrupted by the viscious habits of the
mind. It would be just as absurd for wars, seditious uprisings,
profligate morals, debased laws, corrupt officials, and every similar
curse to a state, to spring from the prince whose wisdom should lay
the storms stirred up by the folly of the common folk. But we often
see states (civitates),/110 well established and flourishing under the
diligent activity of the people, overthrown by mismanagement of the
princes. How unlike a Christian it is to take pleasure in the title
"Master," which many who were not in the fold of Christ have shunned;
that which in their ambition they desire to be but do not want to be
called because of the odium attached to the name. Yet will a Christian
prince think it just in the eyes of God for him to be the same [sort
of man] and be called "The Magnificent?" The emperor Augustus, even
though he had gained the im 110 The translation "cities" is also
possible here.

perial throne through foul intrigue, considered it an insult to be
called "Master;" and when this title was used by an actor before all
the people, he showed his disapproval by his facial expression and his
remarks, as if it were a term of reproach applied to tyrants./111 And
shall the Christian prince not imitate this propriety of the pagan? If
you are master of all your subjects, they must of necessity be your
slaves. Then have a care that you do not fulfill the ancient
proverb:/112 "You have as many enemies as you have slaves." Nature
created all men equal, and slavery was superimposed on nature, which
fact the laws of even the pagans recognized. Now stop and think how
out of proportion it is for a Christian to usurp full power over other
Christians, whom the laws did not design to be slaves, and whom Christ
redeemed from all slavery. Recall the instance when Paul/113 called
Onesimus (who was born a slave) the brother of his former master
Philemon, from the time of his baptism. How incongruous it is to
consider them slaves whom Christ redeemed with the same blood [as He
did you]; whom He declared free along with all others; whom He
fostered with the same sacraments as He did you; whom He calls to the
same heritage of immortality! And over them, who have the same Master
as you, the Prince, Jesus Christ, will you impose the yoke of slavery?

There is only one Master of Christian men./114 Why, then, do those who
assume His functions, prefer to take their pattern of government from
anyone except Him, who alone is in all ways to be imitated? It is
proper enough to gather from others whatever virtues they have; but in
Him is the perfect example of all virtue and wisdom. This seems the
[essence of] foolishness to those outside the faith, but to us, if we
are really faithful, He is the goodness of God and the wisdom of
God. Now I do not want you to think that this means that

----- 111 Cf. Suetonius op. cit., Aug. 53. 112 Quoted in Macrobius
Sat. I. ii. 13; Seneca Ep. Mor. XLVII. 5; Quintus Curtius Rufus
VII. S. 28; and Festus, s. v. quot. 113 Col. 4:9. 114 Cf. Matt. 23:10.

you should be a slave, not a ruler. On the contrary, it illustrates
the finest way to rule, unless, of course, you think God is only a
bondsman because He governs the whole universe without recompense,
because everyone and everything has felt His kindness, although they
give Him nothing in return, and unless the mind seems a slave because
it looks out so zealously for the welfare of the body, which it does
not need, or unless you think the eye is a slave to all the other
parts of the body because it sees for them all. You may well consider
this: if someone should turn all these men whom you call your own into
swine and asses by the art of Circe, would you not say your ruling
power had been reduced to a lower level? I think you would. And yet
you may exercise more authority over swine and asses than over
men. You may treat them as you please, divide them off as you will,
and even kill them. Surely he who has reduced his free subjects to
slaves has put his power on a meaner level. The loftier the ideal to
which you fashion your authority, the more magnificently and
splendidly will you rule. Whoever protects the liberty and standing of
your subjects is the one that helps your sovereign power. God gave the
angels and men free will so that He would not be ruling over bondsmen,
and so that He might glorify and add further grandeur to His
kingdom. And who, now, would swell with pride because he rules over
men cowed down by fear, like so many cattle? Do not overlook the words
of the Gospels or of the writings of the Apostles on the toleration of
a master, on obeying the prefects, on honoring kings, and on paying
tributes. These must have been directed to pagan princes because at
that time there were no Christian princes. The people are bidden to
endure worthless magistrates, so as not to disrupt the order of the
state, provided that they perform their duties and do not give orders
that are opposed to God. If the pagan prince demands honor, Paul/115
bids him be honored; if he demands that taxes be paid, Paul desires
the taxes to be paid; if he demands tribute, Paul orders the tribute
paid. For a Christian

----- 115 Rom. 13:1-7.

is not lowered by such acts, and the princes have certain peculiar
rights and are not to be angered just because there is an
opportunity. But what does he add about Christians?/116 Do not owe
anything to one another unless it be in such a way that you may still
love one another. Surely you do not believe that Christ really owed
tribute to Caesar just because He is said to have paid him a
didrachma! [L 580] According to the Gospel,/117 when He was
treacherously asked whether a people which had been dedicated to God
should pay tribute to Caesar, He bade them bring Him a coin. He did
not recognize it, and as if He did not know, He asked: "Whose is this
image and superscription?" [B 448] When they told Him it was Caesar's,
He gave His ambiguous answer to those who were tempting Him in their
wickedness: "Render therefore unto Caesar the things which are
Caesar's; and unto God, the things that are God's." Thus He outwitted
them in their treacherous questioning and took the opportunity of
calling all to devotion to God, to whom we owe everything. This is
really what He meant: "You see what you owe to Caesar, whom I do not
know; see rather what you owe to God. It is His work I am carrying
out, not Caesar's." I hope that my remarks have not caused any such
questions as this to arise in the minds of anyone: "Why do you deprive
the prince of his own rights, and grant more to a pagan than to a
Christian?" That is not so. I defend the rights of the Christian
prince. To subject his people through fear, to make them perform
servile tasks, to drive them from their possessions, despoil them of
their goods, and finally, even to martyr them - those are the rights
of a pagan prince. You certainly do not want the same things in a
Christian, do you? Or will his rights seem diminished if these same
privileges are not allowed him?

He does not lose his prerogatives, who rules as a Christian should; he
has them in a different way and is as much more distinguished as he is
safe. The following arguments will make that clear. First, those are
not really yours whom you oppress in slavery, for common agreement
makes princes. But they are 116 Rom. 13.8. 117 Matt. 22:17-22.

really yours who yield obedience to you willingly and of their own
accord. Secondly, when you hold people bound to you through fear, you
do not possess them even half. You have their physical bodies, but
their spirits are estranged from you. But when Christian love unites
the people and their prince, then everything is yours that your
position demands, for a good prince does not demand anything for which
service to his country does not call. On the other hand, when he uses
the authority of a master instead of kindness, however much he may
exact certainly he has less than if he had everything. No one gets
more than he who makes no levies but gets everything as his just
due. According to these standards, the honor which is shown a tyrant
is no honor at all but either flattery+ or dissembling; and he gets no
obedience, but slavish compliance. His is not real splendor, but only
arrogance. He does not possess authority, but only force. All these
things in their true form are possessed by the really Christian
prince. No one gets more honor than the man who does not exact it. To
no one are men more willingly obedient than to him who does not seek
such attention. To no one do they more willingly pour out their wealth
than to him whom they know will expend it for the development of the
state and return it with interest.

There is a common relation between the prince and the people. To you
the people owe money, allegiance, and honor. That is all very well;
but you in turn owe the people a good and careful prince. Before you
exact taxes from your subjects as your due, question yourself first
whether you have fulfilled your obligation and duties toward
them. Aristotle/118 says clearly that the theory of supreme authority
is not in the possession, but rather in the use of slaves. Very well;
but much less does the principate consist of titles and statues and
the collection of moneys than in giving thought for others.

Since the state is a sort of body, composed of various members
including the prince himself, it befits him, although different [from
the others], to use moderation so that things will go well for
everyone and not [to act] in such a way that when

----- 118 Pol. I. 7.

all others have been reduced to weakness, one or two healthy and
strong members may be developed. But if the prince rejoices in, and is
supported by, evils he is not part of the state. He is no prince; he
is a brigand.

Aristotle/119 says that the slave is a living part of the master if
the latter is the right kind of master. At any rate there is a
friendly relationship of the part and the whole and a mutual need each
for the other. If this is true between a master and a slave bought at
the block, as they say, how much more true should it be between a
Christian who is of poor birth and a Christian prince? As for the
prince who can think of nothing else and do nothing else except to
extort as much money as possible from his subjects, to see how much
more he can gather in by his laws and for how much he can sell his
magistracies and offices - is he really to be called a prince, or
should he be called a business agent, or, to speak more to the point,
a robber?

When Croesus saw the soldiers of Cyrus running madly and with wild
tumult through the captured city, he asked what they were doing. When
told by Cyrus that they were following the custom of the victorious
army and were plundering the goods of the people, he said, "What is
this I hear? Do not all these things belong to you who have conquered
me? Why, then, are your men despoiling your own possessions?" Acting
on this thought, Cyrus checked his soldiers in their plundering./120
It will be well for the prince to keep this same idea in mind [and say
to himself], "Those things which are being extorted, are really
mine. Those people who are being despoiled and weakened are really my
subjects. Whatever sins I commit against them, I commit against
myself." See that you conduct your rule so that you may readily give
account of your acts. You should be more exacting of yourself if no
one else is going to call you to account, for it will shortly happen
that He will demand account of you. With Him the only effect of your
being a prince will be [the fact] that you will be judged more
severely in proportion to the great power entrusted to you.{onus+}

----- 119 Pol. I. 6. 120 Cf. Herodotus 1. 88.

Even if you were monarch of the whole world, you could not deceive
this judge, nor escape Him, nor frighten Him, nor bribe Him.

After you have once dedicated yourself to the state, you are no longer
free to live according to your own ways. {onus+} You must keep up and
preserve the character which you have assumed. No one enters the
Olympic games without first considering what the rules of the contest
demand. [B 449] And he does not complain that the sun is bothersome,
or the dust, or the perspiration, or any of the other things of this
sort. All these are included in the general conditions of the
sport. Likewise the man who undertakes to rule should first consider
what the position of prince demands. He must give his thought to the
best advantage of others and neglect his personal interests. He must
always be alert so that others may sleep. {Seneca+} {onus+} He must
toil so that others may rest. He must exhibit the highest moral
integrity, while in others a general appearance of uprightness is
enough. His mind must be divested of all private emotions. He who is
carrying on the offices of the state must give his attention to
nothing but that. He must perform kindnesses even to those who are
ungrateful, to those who do not understand, and to those who are
opposed. If these conditions are not to your liking, why do you desire
the burden+ of ruling? Or if you inherited this authority, why do you
not yield it to another? But if this is not possible, at least put the
actual execution of the duties in the hands of some one who meets the
requirements you should have.

A philosopher/121 among the Greeks very wisely said that the best
things are the difficult ones. Accordingly you should remember that it
is alike the honorable+ and the most difficult+ thing to stand out as
a good prince. And do not be concerned if at this time you see some
princes living in such a way that it would be harder to be an average
paterfamilias than a prince of that sort. The old proverb/122 is by no
means without foundation: "He ought to have been born either a king or
a

------ 121 Plutarch Training of Children 9; cf. also Plato
Rep. VI. 497.  122 Quoted in Seneca Apocotocyntosis i.

fool." All other men take great pains to get previous knowledge of the
profession which they follow. How much more care should the prince
take to get an early knowledge of the theory of government! Other arts
are developed from four main essentials: inherent nature, instruction,
precedent, and experience. Plato/123 demands a quiet and mild nature
in a prince. He says that men of sharp and excitable nature are suited
to a military career, but they are entirely unfit for governing. There
are certain moral defects of nature which can be corrected by training
and care. But it is conceivable to find a character either so dull, or
else so wild and untractable, that it would be a fruitless task for
anyone to attempt to develop it. The character of Nero was so corrupt
that even Seneca+, who was a most august and remarkable teacher, could
not prevent him from becoming the most ruinous of princes. As we have
already said, sound doctrines suitable to a prince should be implanted
at once. It was to this same end that Plato/124 wanted his guardians
to take up dialectic at a late period, for that subject deals with
every sort of question and tends to shape one's opinions with regard
to true virtue and the dishonorable. The model in government is to be
taken from God himself and from Christ who was both God and man. From
His teachings there are many principles to be gathered. Trial
practice, which is the last resort, is not a safe thing in the case of
a prince. It is not a matter of great consequence if a young man who
wants to be a great lute-player breaks several instruments [in his
practice]. But it would be a serious matter for the state to be ruined
while the prince is learning. Let the prince be accustomed from
boyhood to be present at consultations, {Hal+} attend trials, to be
present at the creation of magistrates, and hear the demands of kings
[L 582]. But he should be instructed first so that he may better judge
[of what is taking place]. He should not be allowed to make any
decisions unless they are approved by the judgment of many men, until
his age and experience have provided him with a more trustworthy
judgment.

----- 123 Rep. VIII. 547,48; see also ibid., III. 410; VI. 503. 124
Rep. VII. 539; cf. Laws VII. 808.

If Homer/125 was right when he said that the prince, to whom so many
thousand souls and so many burdensome tasks are entrusted, should not
sleep through the whole night, and Vergil/126. was not erring in
judgment when he made his Aeneas the character that he did, whence, I
ask you, does the prince get the leisure time to remain secluded for
whole days, to waste the greatest part of his life in playing at dice,
in dancing, in hunting, in associating with utter fools, and in [other
forms of] idle nonsense, even more frivolous than these? The state is
overthrown by party factions and sorely tried with wars; robbery is
rife everywhere; the poor people are driven to starvation and the
gallows through unrestrained despoliation [of their goods]; the weak
are downtrodden by the iniquitous nobility; the civil officers are
corrupt and do whatever they please, not what is according to
law. {Hal+} In the midst of all this, as if he had no cares in the
world, does the prince have time for gaming?

The man at the wheel cannot be a sleepy-headed fellow. Can the prince
in such times of danger snore [soundly on]? No sea ever has such
dreaded storms+ as constantly beset every kingdom. So it is that the
prince must ever be on his guard against any mistake at all, for he
cannot make an error without great loss to many people.

The size of his ship, the value of his cargo, the number of his
passengers does not make the good master merely swell with pride, but
it makes him all the more concerned in his responsibility. So it is
with a good king; the more people he rules over, the more watchful he
should be, not the more arrogant. {onus+} If you will only think of
the great task you have undertaken, you will never be at a loss for
something to do. If you are accustomed to take your pleasure in the
progress of your people, you will never be at a loss for a source of
enjoyment. In this way there is no chance for ennui to trick the good
prince with the gay pleasures of leisure.

A prince should first be taught that principle which has been given to
the wisest men: Choose the best plan of life, not the

----- 125 Iliad V. 490. 12O Aeneid I. 305.

pleasantest. Continued habit finally makes these best principles the
most delightful. The painter gets pleasure from a picture beautifully
executed [B 450]. The farmer, the truck gardener, the smith, all get
pleasure from their work. What should bring more enjoyment to the
prince than the contemplation of his country, improved and more
flourishing as a result of his efforts? No one can deny that it is an
onerous task [to try] to be a good prince; but it is far more
troublesome to be a really wicked one. There is far less for the man
who follows the course of nature and of honor to do, than for him who
owes his existence to trickery and deceits./127 {Shylock+} If you are
a real prince, it will be most unusual if you do not feel a great
source of pride in your heart when you recall in your mind how, in one
instance, a war was wisely avoided; in another, how an uprising was
effectively suppressed, {Hal+} and with very little bloodshed; and
again, the election of some particular man to office; and finally,
your own conscious plans for the state and your own name. This sort of
pleasure becomes a Christian prince./128 Store up the basis of it for
yourself by acts of goodness every day. Leave those empty pleasures of
the common folk to the rabble.

Solomon/129 was praised by all because at a time when he was free to
ask whatever he wanted and would have instantly received whatever he
asked for, he did not ask for great wealth, nor world empire, nor the
destruction of his enemies, nor great honor and fame, nor worldly
pleasures, but he asked for wisdom. And not just an indifferent sort
of wisdom either, but such as he could use to govern with credit the
kingdom which had been entrusted to him. Just the opposite is true of
Midas, who is condemned by everyone because nothing was more precious
to him than gold. But why should we have one judgment for facts of
history and another for actual life? We pray that our prince will have
good fortune+, and victories, and glory+, and long life, and
riches. If we really are devoted to our prince, why do we not ask for
that one thing which Solomon asked for? And do not think his request
was ill

----- 127 Cf. Seneca De ira II. 13. 1-2. 128 Cf. Aristotle
Pol. VII. 1; Ethics VII. 13. 129 I Kings 3:5-12.

advised. He was praised by God because of it. Why should we say that
that quality which alone is important has nothing to do with the
matter? Yet there are plenty who believe that this one thing alone,
wisdom of the prince, is a stumbling block to actual rule. They say
that a vigorous spirit weakens and becomes faint hearted. But it is
only rashness, not boldness, only foolishness, not alertness, to have
no fear for that which you consider nothing. The firm resolution of
the prince must be sought from other sources. Young men very often
take a chance after this fashion, but even more do those who act in a
fit of anger. A sense of fear is an advantageous quality which points
out danger, teaches one to avoid it, and restrains one from wicked and
pernicious ways. The one man who has to look out for everyone must
especially examine things. Whoever has to plan for everyone and
everything must have an especial store of wisdom. What God is in the
universe, what the sun is in the world, what the eye is in the body,
that the prince should be in his state.

Those wise men of old who used to employ hieroglyphs and to throw a
shadowy veil over the scheme of life with their symbolism, used to
depict a king in this fashion: they added a scepter to the eye,
symbolizing an upright life, a spirit that cannot be turned by any
conditions from right, and inherently connected with prudence and the
essence of watchfulness./130 Some represent the king's scepter in this
fashion: on the top is a stork, the symbol of devotion, and on the
other end is that wild and dreadful creature, the hippopotamus. This
means that if any fierce passions, such as wrath, vengefulness,
greediness, and violence rage within the prince, devotion to his
country will overcome and suppress these emotions./131{emblem+}
License, born of good fortune, and worldly success lead to insolent
arrogance, but patriotism should be stronger. According to
Plutarch/132 the ancient Thebans used to have certain seated figures
without hands among their sacred images. The first of these also was
without eyes. The fact

----- 130 Cf. Plutarch Of Isis and Osiris 10. 131 Cf. Plutarch Water
and Land Animals 4. 132 Plutarch Of Isis and Osiris 10.

that they are seated means that magistrates and judges ought to be of
a stable character not disturbed by any personal emotions. Their lack
of hands clearly means that they should be pure and free from all
corrupting bribes. The prince without eyes means that the [true] king
is not to be led astray from the course of honor by bribes; is not to
be affected by regard for someone else; but is only to learn from what
he hears. {justice+} There is more along this line. The prince should
learn to philosophize about those very decorations with which he is
adorned. What does the anointing of the king mean, unless the greatest
mildness of spirit? What significance has the crown 'on his head, if
not wisdom that is absolute? What is the meaning of the collar of
plaited gold around his neck, except the union and harmony of all
virtues+? What is symbolized by the bright rays of gems shining with
many colors, if not the highest degree of virtue and that whatever is
honorable ought to be found in a special degree in the prince? What
does the rich purple mean, except an ardent love toward his subjects?
What do his various decorations mean, except that he should either
equal or exceed the glorious_deeds+, of his ancestors? What is the
significance of the sword that is carried before him, unless that his
country ought to be safe under the protection of this man, safe both
from outside enemies and those within? {emblem+}

The first duty of a good prince is to desire the best things
possible. The second duty, to see by what means all things that are
evil can be avoided or removed; and on the other hand, how good
conditions can be gained, developed, and strengthened. In the case of
a private citizen it is perhaps quite enough that he should have a
good mind, since he is directed by the laws, and the public officials
set forth what he shall do. But in the case of the prince, it is of
little help that he shall have been endowed with a good mind that
desires the best things if there is not also present wisdom which
points the way to gain that which the prince desires. How little
difference there is between a marble statue inscribed with the names
of Croesus or Cyrus, magnificently set off with diadem and scep-

ter, and a prince without a heart - unless you say that the senseless
state of the one does no harm, while the latter's folly operates to
the great misfortune of everyone./133 [B 451] Judge yourself, not on
your physical appearance or by your good fortune+, but on the
qualities of your spirit. Measure yourself, not by the commendations
of others, but by the standard of your own deeds+. Since you are a
prince, do not admit of any commendations which are not worthy of a
prince. If anyone speaks about your appearance, remember that women
are praised after that fashion. If anyone praises your easy flowing
speech, remember that such terms of commendation are applied to the
sophists and rhetoricians. If anyone calls attention to your bodily
strength and vigor, remember that that sort of praise is to be applied
to athletes, not princes. If anyone extols your lofty station, this
should be your thought: "He would praise me rightly if there were
something to be taken from my high place." If there is someone who
praises your wealth, remember that such praise is for the bankers. So
far, while you have been listening to such laudatory remarks as the
preceding, you have heard nothing that fits a prince.

What then is fitting praise for a prince? If he has eyes to the back
as well as to the front (as Homer/134 says, qui voit devant et
derriere), that is, if he can look back on what has already happened
and ahead to the future, thereby having the greatest knowledge
possible, his wisdom will be used for the good of his country, not for
himself. In no other way can his wisdom be turned to his own good than
by using it for his country. If any one should praise a physician
because he is handsome, wellbuilt, of good connections, possessed of
plenty of money, and because he plays handsomely at dice, dances with
skill, sings well, and plays a good game of ball, would you not
immediately say to yourself: [L 584] "What has all this to do with a
physician?" When you hear the same sort of thing from foolish
eulogizers, there is even more reason for

----- 133 Cf. Plutarch Discourse to an Unlearned Prince 2. 134 Iliad
III. 109, 10. The original text of Erasmus reads Okijtov xQ6cFa(o xoti
6iticoo.

you to say, "What has this to do with a prince?" There are three
essentials that are sought in a physician+. First, he must thoroughly
know the practice of medicine, the relative powers of the body and of
diseases, and the proper treatment of each malady. Secondly, he must
be reliable, and have no interest other than the health of the
patient, [although] some are moved by ambition or [lust for] wealth to
administer a drug instead of a remedy. Thirdly, he must exercise all
due care and diligence. For a prince, these same points are even far
more important.

In his Politics, Aristotle/135 asks the question, "What does the
average man demand in his prince ?" Is it the figure of Nereus, or the
strength of Milo, or the stature of Maximinus, or the wealth of
Tantalus? No; it is none of these things. What is the answer then? He
must have virtue in its highest and purest form and he must be content
with a golden mean in his private affairs.

If you can be at the same time a prince and a good man, you will be
discharging a handsome service. If you cannot, then yield the [chance
to be] prince, rather than become a wicked man merely to enjoy it. It
is quite possible to find a good man who would not make a good prince;
but there can be no good prince who is not also a good_man+. Yet the
ways of some princes have slipped back to such a point that the two
ideas of "good man" and "prince" seem to be the very antitheses of one
another. It is obviously considered foolish and ridiculous to mention
[the idea of] a good man in speaking of a prince. But you cannot be a
king unless reason completely controls you; that is, unless under all
circumstances you follow [the course of] advice and judgment. You
cannot rule over others, until you yourself have obeyed the course of
honor./136 Those expressions of a tyrant, "Such is my will," "This is
my bidding, "Let will replace reason," should be far removed from the
mind of the prince. And far more that other one/137 which already has
come into the open malediction of men,

----- 135 Pol. III. 17; cf. ibid., I. 13. 136 Cf. Plato Laws VI. 762;
Cicero Laws III. 2. 5. 137 Quoted in Seneca De clementia 1. 12. 4;
Cicero De off. 1. 28. 97; et al.

"Let them hate, if only they fear." {Hal+} It is the mark of a tyrant
and womanish, too - to follow the unbridled will of your mind; and
fear+ is the poorest surety for a long duration of office. Let this be
the permanent policy of the prince: to harass no one, to help
everyone, especially his own subjects; to tolerate evils, or else to
remedy them, as he will judge expedient for the common good. Whoever
does not take this attitude toward the state is a tyrant, not a
prince. If anyone would call you a tyrant and a robber, instead of a
prince, would you not be greatly aroused and prepare severe penalties
[for him]? You would, and rightly so, for insult is bitter and should
not be borne under any condition. I wish you would think this over:
"How much more abusive is that charge to one who is willingly the sort
of man that he is charged with being." For it is a more serious matter
to be a thief than to be called one, and it is more hideous to violate
a maiden than to upbraid her for her sin.

If you want to be called just what you are, then see that you conduct
yourself in such a manner that you enjoy an excellent reputation, and
you will follow the surest road./138 For that is no true praise which
is extorted through fear+ or is paid by flatterers+. It is bad when
the reputation of the prince and its protection lie in silence imposed
through threats. Although your own age may maintain perfect silence,
posterity wiII surely talk. Who was ever so formidable a tyrant that
he could check the tongues of everyone? The first caution of a
Christian prince must be exercised on the point upon which Seneca/139
has impressively discoursed. Among those who are called "king," there
are found some who, by comparison with Phalaris, Dionysius, Polycrates
(the very names of all of them have become an abomination in all ages)
are unworthy even to be called "tyrants." It does not matter by what
road, but it does matter to what end, you are tending. He who looks to
the good of his people is a king; he who is concerned for himself is a
tyrant. But now what terms shall we apply to

----- 138 Xenophon Cyropaedia I. 6. 22. 139 De clementia 1. 12. i;
ibid., II. 4. 3.

those who increase their own good fortune by the misfortunes of their
country and are, in practice, robbers? Shall it be "prince," but
falsely?

In his Laws Plato/140 forbade any one to name God as the cause of any
evil, because by nature He is good and kind. [B 452] But the prince
(if he is a real prince) is a sort of likeness of God./141 How
inconsistent with this prototype are they who manage things in such a
way that whatever evils spring up in the state arise from their
misdeeds?

No attention should be given to any chance flatterer who says, "But
that is only to reduce the station of the prince." On the contrary, he
who wants to permit the prince what is not honorable is really
lowering the prince! In what else does lowering a prince consist than
in making him like the common run Of men; to be a slave to anger,
lust, ambition, avarice, and beholden to folly? {vice_list+} Would it
be a shameful outrage and one not to be tolerated if that were not
granted to a prince which is not granted God himself? God does not
demand that He be allowed to act contrary to the course of
propriety. But if He did, He would no longer be God! Consequently,
whoever wants to grant the prince those things which will act contrary
to the nature and reason of a prince despoils him of the honor+ of a
prince and makes him one of the common throng. A prince should be
unashamed to owe allegiance to honor, when God himself obeys it. And
let him not think he is any less a prince if he approach the very
image of the greatest Prince with his every effort.

Such seeds as all these should be sown in the young heart of the boy
by his parents, his nurses, and his tutor in order to make him a
prince. These principles he should learn willingly, not under
compulsion. In this manner it is fit for a prince who

----- 140 Although Erasmus distinctly refers to the Laws here, I can
find no passage in that work which compares to Rep. II. 380 which is a
perfect parallel. It is quite possible that Erasmus was quoting from
memory and confused the title. The thought of Laws X. 901 is only
vaguely suggestive of his statement. Cf. also Plutarch According to
the Doctrines of EpicuruS 22. 141 This idea, already encountered, is
found in several ancient writers (see above, chap. iii) and is very
common in the medieval period (see above, chap. v).

is to rule over free and willing subjects to be developed. Let him
learn to love morality and loath dishonor; let him be restrained from
shameful acts by a sense of shame, not of fear. Although there is some
hope of a good prince to be found in changed ways and tempered
passion, the main hope lies in sound ideas; for sometimes shame
corrects wicked morals and maturer age or correction changes depraved
desires. But when the argument is brought forth that that which is
foreign to honor is joined with virtue and that that which is far more
fitting a tyrant is an excellent function of a prince, that is, when
the fountain from which all actions of life flow are polluted, then
correction will be a very difficult matter. Therefore, in this matter
of instruction, as has been said, the first and foremost care should
be to see that all low ideas of the common folk are pulled out by the
roots from within the prince's spirit, if by any chance they have
gained root there, and that they are replaced by salutary thoughts,
worthy of a Christian prince.

II+.THE PRINCE MUST AVOID FLATTERERS+


But the objective [just mentioned above] cannot be accomplished,
unless every means is used to stave off abject flatterers. To this
malicious tribe the good fortune of great princes is especially
exposed. The very innocence of the prince's age makes it vulnerable to
attacks of this evil, partly because by natural inclination it takes
more pleasure in blandishments than in truth, and partly because of
inexperience. The less one suspects trickery, the less one knows how
to avoid it. Let no one think that the evil of flatterers (being a
sort of minor evil) should be passed over: the most flourishing
empires of the greatest kings have been overthrown by the tongues of
flatterers. Nowhere do we read of a state which has been oppressed
under a great tyranny in which flatterers did not play the leading
roles in the tragedy. Unless I am mistaken Diogenes/1 had this clearly
in mind. When asked what animal was the most dangerous of all, he said
"If you mean among the wild beasts, I will say the tyrant; if among
the tame ones, the flatterer." This pest has a pleasing sort of
poison, but it is instantaneous, so that once demented by it, princes
who were conquerors of the world allowed utterly worthless flatterers
to sport with them and ride them roughly. Those abominable wretches of
society, libertines and sometimes even slaves, dominated the masters
of the world!

In the first place, care must be taken to have nurses that are either
immune from this disease or else subject to it only in

----- 1 Cf. Plutarch How to Distinguish between a Friend and a
Flatterer 19, where the thought is attributed to Bias, another of the
seven sages of Greece. Since Erasmus translated the particular essay
of Plutarch in which this passage is found, he must have been familiar
with it. The interchange of names, Diogenes and Bias, can easily be
explained if Erasmus was quoting from memory, and this situation seems
likely from the words "unless I am mistaken."

its very mildest form. That particular sex is especially subject to
this malady. Besides that, most nurses have the same fault that
mothers have, the greater number of them spoil the characters of their
children through indulgence. All of this group should be kept away
from the future prince in so far as is possible, because they seem by
their very nature to be subject to the two great faults - folly and
flattery. The next concern is to add companions of an honest character
- in addition to the training from the tutor - so that they will be
affable+ without using flattery, [L 586] will be accustomed to speak
elegantly, and will not deceive or lie merely to curry favor. On the
matter of choosing a teacher I have already expressed myself.

The matter of the prince's ministers is of no small moment, for they
frequently favor the rash desires of youth, either because of
stupidity or because they hope some gain will be theirs as a
result. It will be well to select men for this duty, in so far as it
is possible, who are sagacious and trustworthy, and in addition, to
impose a restraint upon them in their assent by means of warnings and
threats and also to use rewards to urge them to discharge their office
honorably. This will be greatly helped if anyone who is caught
perverting the mind of the prince with biased talk and ignoble
complaisance to those things which are unworthy of a prince, [B 453]
would have publicly to suffer punishment (even death, if the crime
should call for it) as an example to others. This should not seem
cruel to anyone, since we inflict the death penalty (and that quite
beyond the example of all the laws of the ancients) on a thief who has
chanced to steal a few dollars. The supreme penalty should be paid by
him who wishes to corrupt the best and most precious thing the country
has. If the novelty of the idea presents an obstacle to its adoption
(although the Roman emperor Alexander/2 ordered a vain boaster+ of
Thurium bound to a stake, heaped about with green logs, and suffocated
from their smoke) an example can be cleverly arranged in another way:
if some one is convicted of any other capital offense, still

----- Scriptores historiae Augustae, Alex. Sev. XXXVI. 2, 3.

let him be punished on the charge of corrupting the mind of the future
prince by malicious flattery. If one is going to weigh the relations
of crimes in the matters of punishment, a malicious flatterer who
corrupts and biases the early years of the prince's life with
tyrannical ideas does more harm than one who plunders the public
treasury. Whoever tampers with the coinage of the prince is visited
with elaborate punishment; for those who corrupt the character of the
prince there is almost a reward!

If only that statement of Carneades/3 were less true among us
Christians! He said that the sons of kings could not properly learn
anything except the art of horsemanship, because in all other matters
everyone humored them and obsequiously agreed; but a horse+,{Lear+}
since he does not know whether his rider is a nobleman or a commoner,
a rich man or a poor man, a prince or a subject, throws any unskilled
rider who mounts him. Frequently we see it happen that not only the
nurses and companions and ministers flatter the sons of princes, but
even the tutor and preceptor of his youth who only wishes to gain
further riches for himself, manages his duties without a thought to
making a better prince. At no infrequent intervals do those who are
assembled on holy matters speak graciously, seeking after the favor of
princes and courtiers; and if they have any reproach to make, their
correction is so phrased that even then they seem most flattering. I
do not speak in this fashion because I believe approval should be
given those who madly rage with turbulent clamors against the lives of
princes, but because I desire the example of a good prince to be set
forth by them without abuse, so that those matters which the pagans
condemned in their pagan rulers should not be approved by flattering
adulation in a Christian prince. I mean that magistrates do not
frankly give their advice, and that the counselors do not amicably
confer together. The nobility dissent from one another in their
interests, and consequently they all zealously court the favor of the
prince, but only to vanquish a rival or to give an enemy no chance for
doing harm. {Lear+}

----- 3 Plutarch How to Distinguish between a Friend and a Flatterer
16.

The priests flatter the prince, the physicians slavishly agree with
him. Now and then to listen to true words of praise from orators come
from abroad is perfectly proper. There still remains one holy stay -
and even that often fails. I refer to those whom the common folk call
the "royal confessors." If they would be impartial and prudent, surely
in that most intimate confidence they could help the prince with
loving and frank advice. But it very often happens that while each one
is watching out for his own interests he neglects the welfare of the
state. Less harm is done by the poets and rhetoricians, to none of
whom is unknown the scheme of measuring the praises of the princes not
by the princes merits, but by their own genius. Far more dangerous is
that group of magicians and soothsayers who promise long life,
victories, triumphs, pleasures, and empires to some kings and again to
others threaten sudden death, downfall, misfortune, and exile, thereby
abusing the two principle tyrants of human life, hope and fear. To
this class belong the astrologers who foretell the future from the
stars. Whether they have any real skill or not, it is not for me to
discuss here. As they now have a hold on the common people, they are
causing no small trouble to humanity. {Lear+}

The most deadly of all flatterers are those who under a guise of
candor assent, and by a wonderful artifice are able to urge one
rigorously on while they are putting up a resistance, and to praise
while scolding. Plutarch/4 has admirably depicted them in his little
essay entitled How to Distinguish a Friend from a Flatterer.

There are two periods of life which are especially susceptible to
flattery: extreme youth because of its inexperience, and old age
because of its weakness. {Lear+} However, folly is found in every
period and brings its handmaiden, conceit. Plato/5 is right in his
warning that the most dangerous type of flattery is flattery of one's
self, which consequently makes one ready game for others who do just
what he does of his own accord. There is a tacit sort of adulation in
pictures, statues, and

----- 4 Ibid., 18, 19. 5 Laws V. 731, 32.

honorary titles. Apelles/6 flattered Alexander the Great in this
manner by painting him hurling a thunderbolt; and Octavius took great
pleasure in being painted in the likeness of Apollo./7 The same thing
applies to those huge statues of colossal proportion, far greater than
human size, which were formerly set up to the emperors. Perhaps this
next point will seem trivial to some, but it really is of some
consequence that artists should represent a prince in the dress and
manner that befits a wise and serious prince. It is better to
represent the prince as doing something in connection with state
business, than as in a position of idleness; for example, [the statue
of] Alexander holding his hand over one ear as he heard a case [tried
before him] , [B 454] or that of Darius holding a pomegranate, or that
of Scipio restoring to a youth his promised bride unharmed and
rejecting the gold that had been offered. The princely halls should be
adorned with wholesome pictures of the sort just suggested instead of
those which inculcate wantonness, vain glory, or tyranny.

Now in the matter of titles I would not say that his due honor should
not be shown the prince, but I should prefer the titles to be of the
sort that would remind the prince of his duties; that is, I should
prefer to have him called, "The Honorable," "The Incorruptible," "The
Wise," "The Clement," "The Kind," "The Judicious," "The Watchful,"
"The Temperate," "The Zealous," rather than "The Exalted," "The
invincible," "The Triumphant," "The Ever August," so as not to recount
thereby exalted position, inviolate majesty, divinity, and even more
flattering titles than these. I approve the custom by which they now
call the Roman Pontiff "His Holiness," for by hearing this title
constantly he is advised what qualities he should show and what is
most becoming in him: not great wealth or rule over a very wide
domain, but distinction for his moral purity. But if the prince cannot
avoid hearing these usual titles at times, even against his own
desires, still he should not refrain from showing by what kind

----- 6 Cf. Plutarch Alex. IV. 2. 7 Cf. Suetonius Aug. 70.

he is more pleased. Alexander Severus/8 is said to have considered all
flatterers distasteful to such a degree that if anyone saluted him in
too humble a manner or bowed his head with too great a show of
reverence, straightway he upbraided him with vehement reproach; or if
the subject's position or office prevented open reproach, he was
censured by a severe scowl. The boy should be instructed to turn to
his own advantage those titles to which he is forced to listen. He
hears [himself called] "Father+ of his Country": let him think that no
title could ever be given to princes which more perfectly accords
[with the nature of] a good prince than does that of "Father of his
Country." He must then act in such a way as to appear worthy of that
title. If he thinks of it in that way, it will be a warning; but if he
takes it otherwise, it will be fawning adulation.

If the prince is called "The Unconquerable," let him think how
ridiculous it is for one to be called unconquerable who is conquered
by wrath+, who daily is a slave to passion, and whom ambition pulls
and leads as a captive whither she will. {Lear+} He is truly
unconquerable who gives way to no passion and under no pretext can be
deflected from the course of honor.

When the prince is referred to as "The Serene," let it occur to him
that it is the duty of the prince to keep everything peaceful and
composed. But if anyone disturbs and confuses the order of things
through his ambitions or his anger, by seditions and the upheavals of
wars, the title of "The Serene" does not add honor to him, [L 588] but
mockingly flings his shortcomings hard at him. When he is called "The
Exalted," let him understand that there is no real honor except that
which springs from virtue and good deeds. If anyone is defiled by
license, contaminated by greed, sullied by ambition - what then is the
title of "The Exalted," if not an admonition if he who has erred was
an impudent man, or an open reproach, if the sinner should have known
better? When the prince hears his various titles from the provinces,
let him not immediately swell with conceit as if he were the absolute
master of so many

----- 8 Scriptores historiae Augustae, Alex. Sev. 18. i.

affairs, but let him think to how many he is morally obliged to be a
good prince. If anyone should offer the title of "Your Highness,"
"Your Majesty," "Your Divine Excellence," let the prince remember that
they are not appropriate unless he governs his kingdom after the
fashion of God, with a sort of celestial magnanimity. When the prince
listens to the usual panegyrics, let him not straightway believe them
or be well disposed toward praises of himself, but if he is not yet
such an one as his praises proclaim him, let him take that as advice
and give his attention to making his acts correspond to his
praises. If he already fulfills them, then he should strive to be
better.

The very laws will also have to be under suspicion. Even these
sometimes yield openly to the prince, for they are either compiled or
established by the closest adherents of the kings and emperors. When
they tell the prince that he is not bound by the laws, they yield
themselves to him; when they ascribe to him power over everything, he
must be careful not to think immediately that he may do anything that
suits his fancy. To a good prince everything can be entrusted with
safety; to a mediocre one, some things; to a bad one, nothing.

Demetrius Phalareus/9 wisely urges the reading of books, because the
prince may frequently learn from them things which his friends would
not dare to advise. But the prince must be forearmed with an antidote,
after this fashion:/10 he whom you are reading is a pagan; you who are
reading, are a Christian. Although he speaks with authority on many
subjects, yet he by no means gives an accurate picture of the good
prince. Look out that you do not chance upon something in his works
which you think you must therefore imitate directly. Measure
everything by the Christian standard.

The first matter is the selection of authors, for the sort of books
the boy first reads and absorbs is of prime importance. Wicked
conversations ruin the mind, and in no less a degree do wicked
books. Those mute letters are transformed into manners and moods,
especially if they come upon a native

----- 9 PIutarch Apophthegmata, s. v. Demetrius Phalareus. 10
Cf. Plutarch How a Young Man Ought to Hear Poetry 8.

character that is prone to some weakness. A boy that is wild and
impetuous by nature would easily be incited to tyranny, if without
forewarning he should read about Achilles, Alexander the Great,
Xerxes, or Julius Caesar.{history+} But today we see many a one taking
delight in the tales of Arthur and Lancelot, and other tales of
similar nature [B 455] which are not only about tyrants but are also
very poorly done, stupid, and fit to be "old wives' tales," so that it
would be more advisable to put in one's time reading the comedies or
the legends of the poets instead of nonsense of that sort. But if any
should desire to make use of my plan, as soon as the elements of
language have been taught, he should set forth the Proverbs of
Solomon, Ecclesiasticus, and the Book of Wisdom, not with the idea
that the boy may be tormented with the {emblem+} four senses (sensus)
of thetheologian+/8 by a vaunting interpreter, but that he may fitly
show in a few words whatever pertains to the functions of a good
prince. First a love for the author and his work must be
inculcated. You are destined to rule, he [the author] explains the art
of ruling. You are the son of a king, yourself a future king you will
hear what the wisest king of all teaches his own son, whom he is
preparing to be his successor. Later take the Gospels. There the means
by which the spirit of the boy is kindled with a love for the writer
and his work is of great importance, for no small part will depend
upon the cleverness and opportunism of the one interpreting, to
explain briefly, clearly, plausibly, and vividly, not everything, but
just those points which have most to do with the office of the prince
and those that will cause [the young prince] to rid his mind of the
undermining ideas common to the general run of princes. In the third
place, read the Apophthegmata of Plutarch+ and then his Morals, for
nothing can be found purer than these works. I should also prefer his
Lives+ to those of anyone else. After Plutarch, I would readily assign
the next place to Seneca+, whose writings are wonderfully stimulating
and excite one to enthusiasm for [a life of] moral integrity, raise
the mind of the reader from sordid cares, and especially decry tyranny
everywhere. From the Politics of Aristotle and from the

Offices/11 of Cicero many pasages that are worth knowing can well be
culled out. But Plato+ is the most venerable source of such things -
in my opinion at least. Cicero has followed him in part in his work
The Laws; that entitled The Republic is lost.

Now I shall not deny that a great fund of wisdom may be gathered from
reading the historians+, but you will also draw out the very essence
of destruction from these same sources unless you are forearmed and
read with discretion. Be on guard lest the names of writers and
leaders celebrated by the approval of centuries deceive
you. Herodotus+ and Xenophon+ were both pagans and often set forth the
worst types of prince, even if they did write history, the one to give
pleasure through his narrative, the other to show the picture of an
exceptional leader. Sallust and Livy tell us many things very clearly
and everything very learnedly to be sure, but they do not weigh all
that they tell, and they approve some things which are by no means to
be approved for a Christian prince. When you hear about Achilles+,
Xerxes+, Cyrus+, Darius+, and JuliusCaesar+, do not be carried away
and deluded by the great names. You are hearing about great raging
robbers, for that is what Seneca/12 has called them on various
occasions.

But yet, if you happen upon anything in these works that is worthy of
a good prince, take care to rescue it as you would a jewel from a dung
heap. There never was a tyrant so detestable that he did not do some
things which, if they were not done in the cause of virtue, at least
may be fitted to the example of such a quality. There are many things
in the letters of Phalaris which are not unworthy of any excellent
king, and his own creation reacted despotically enough on Perillus,
the instigator of cruelty./13 Alexander+ did many things like a
madman, but he acted honorably in keeping aloof from the captured
women of Darius, and equally so when he ordered a woman

----- 11 This erroneous translation of the title to Cicero's work De
officiis (On Duty) is kept because of its established usage. 12 De ira
III. 16. 3, 4; ibid., II. 2. 3; ibid., III. 21. 1. I cannot find a
specific passage on Julius Caesar; Gaius Caesar (Caligula) is
mentioned in a context fitting our reference in De ira III. 19. 13
Cf. Plutarch Parallels 39.

sent back upon learning that she was married. /14 [Such things as]
these are to be selected; then the examples of pagan or bad men have a
great stimulus. [Ask yourself this:] if a tyrant and a pagan showed
this selfrestraint; if this youthful conqueror showed this honorable
attitude toward the women of the enemy, what should I, as a Christian
prince do toward mine? If there was so much soul in a mere chit
(mulieicula), what should a man show? If that was set down as a
disgrace for a pagan prince by a pagan, how much zeal must I apply to
keep a straight course, I, who profess Christianity!

How one may pile up examples by expansion I believe I have pointed out
clearly enough in my book De copia rerum. But even the examples of
evils can be turned to good. Great application and loftiness of spirit
such as Julius Caesar used to favor his ambitions+ you should expend
to the general good of your country. The clemency such as he feigned
for preparing and bolstering up his tyrannical sway you should
earnestly use to win for yourself the love of your
subjects. {expediency+}

The examples of very depraved princes sometimes incite one to a higher
standard than do those of the mediocre princes, or even the best, for
who is not checked in his avaricious desires by the story of
Vespasian's/15 tax on urine, and his statement, equally as disgusting
as the tax, "Money has a good smell, whatever its source;" and that
detestable phrase of Nero,/16 with which he regularly instructed his
officers, "You know what I want, and see that no one has anything." By
this method, whatever is found in the historian may be turned into an
example+ for conducting one's self well. See that you choose for
yourself only the best of the leaders from the whole throng - such men
as Aristides, Epaminondas, Octavius, Trajan, Antoninus Pius, Alexander
Mammeas. Nor yet should you take them in their entirety, but you
should choose the best from the best, just as there are some things in
David and Solomon (both kings who were praised by god) which you
avoid.

----- 14 Cf. Plutarch Alex. xxi. 3; see also xii. 15 Suetonius
Vesp. 23. 3. 16 Suetonius Nero 32-4.

[B 456] Now what could be more senseless than for a man who has
received the sacraments of the Christian church to set up as an
example for himself Alexander, Julius Caesar, or Xerxes, for even the
pagan writers would have attacked their lives if any of them had had a
little sounder judgment? As it would be most disgraceful to be
surpassed by them in any honorable deed of theirs, so it would be the
last degree of madness for a Christian prince to wish to imitate them
without change.

The prince should have thorough warning that not all of the things
that he reads in the Holy Scriptures are to be straightway
imitated. Let him learn that the battles and the butcheries of the
Hebrews, and their barbarity toward their enemies, are to be
interpreted allegorically+; otherwise it would be most disastrous to
read them. [L 590] One course was allowed that people because of the
standards of the time; quite a different one is laid down for the
heaven-blessed Christian peoples.

Whenever the prince picks up a book, he should do so not with the idea
of gaining pleasure but of bettering himself by his reading. He who
really wants to be better can easily find the means of becoming
better. A great part of goodness is the desire to be good; for
example, anyone who knows and hates the disease of political ambition,
irascibility, or passionate desire, and opens a book [to find
something] by which he may cure his malady, easily finds a remedy that
will either remove the cause or [at any rate] lessen it.

From no source is the truth more honestly and advantageously gained
than from books; but the prince should accustom his friends to believe
that they will gain favor by giving frank advice. It is the part of
those who are closely associated with the prince to give him counsel+
that is seasonable, appropriate, and friendly. It will be well for the
prince to pardon those whose counsel is crudely given, so that there
may be no example to deter his good counselors from their duty.{Lear+}

During a great tempest even the most skillful navigators will listen
to advice from a layman. But the ship of state is

never without a storm. Who could pay sufficient praise to the prudence
in public matters which was displayed by Philip, king of Macedon, who
freed the man by whom he was privately advised that he looked
ungraceful when seated with his cloak pulled up to his knees./17
{Lear+} What he did in a trivial matter should be done much more by a
prince for his country during stirring events; for example, in
undertaking a journey to foreign lands, in revising the laws, in
establishing treaties, in beginning war.

----- 17 Plutarch Apoththegmata, s. v. Philip.

III+. THE ARTS OF PEACE

Although the writers of antiquity divided the whole theory of state
government into two sections, war and peace, the first and most
important objective is the instruction of the prince in the matter of
ruling wisely during times of peace, in which he should strive his
utmost to preclude any future need for the science of war. In this
matter it seems best that the prince should first know his own
kingdom. {Hal+} This knowledge is best gained from [a study of]
geography and history and from frequent visits through his provinces
and cities. Let him first be eager to learn the location of his
districts and cities, with their beginnings, their nature,
institutions, customs, laws, annals, and privileges. No one can heal
the body until he is thoroughly conversant with it. No one can
properly till a field which he does not understand. To be sure, the
tyrant takes great care in such matters, but it is the spirit, not the
act, which singles out the good prince. The physician studies the
functions of the body so as to be more adept in healing it; the
poisoning assassin, to more surely end it! Next, the prince should
love the land over which he rules just as a farmer loves the fields of
his ancestors or as a good man feels affection toward his
household. He should make it his especial interest to hand it over to
his successor, whosoever he may be, better than he received it. If he
has any children, devotion toward them should urge him on; if he has
no family, he should be guided by devotion to his country; and he
should always keep kindled the flame of love for his subjects. He
should consider his kingdom as a great body of which he is the most
outstanding member and remember that they who have entrusted all their
fortunes and their very safety to the good faith of one man are
deserving of consideration. He should keep constantly in mind the ex-

ample of those rulers to whom the welfare of their people was dearer
than their own lives; for it is obviously impossible for a prince to
do violence to the state without injuring himself. In the second place
the prince will see to it that he is loved by his subjects in return,
but in such a way that his authority is no less strong among
them. There are some who are so stupid as to strive to win good will
for themselves by incantations and magic rings, when there is no charm
more efficacious than good character itself; {Prospero+} nothing can
be more lovable than that, for, as this is a real and immortal_good+,
{Cassio+} so it brings a man true and undying good will. The best
formula is this: let him love, who would be loved, so that he may
attach his subjects to him as God has won the peoples of the world to
Himself by His goodness./1

They are also wrong who win the hearts of the masses by largesses,
feasts, and gross indulgence. It is true that some popular favor,
instead of affection, is gained by these means, but it is neither
genuine nor permanent. In the meanwhile the greed of the populace is
developed, which, as happens, [B 457] after it has reached large
proportions thinks nothing is enough. Then there is an uprising,
unless complete satisfaction is made to their demands. By this means
your people are not won, but corrupted./2 And so by this means the
[average] prince is accustomed to win his way into the hearts of the
people after the fashion of those foolish husbands who beguile their
wives with blandishments, gifts, and complaisance, instead of winning
their love by their character and good actions. So at length it comes
about that they are not loved; instead of a thrifty and well mannered
wife they have a haughty and intractable one; instead of an obedient
spouse they find one who is quarrelsome and rebellious. Or take the
case of those unhappy women who desperately try to arouse love in
their husbands' hearts by giving them drugs, with the result that they
have madmen instead of sane lovers.

The wife should first learn the ways and means of loving

----- 1 Cf. Cicero De off. II. 6. 22-7. 23; Xenophon Cyropaedia
VIII. 2. 1. 2 Cf. Cicero, op. cit., II. 15. 53.

her husband and then let him show himself worthy of her love. And so
with the people - let them become accustomed to the best, and let the
prince be the source of the best things. Those who begin tolove+
through reason, love long. In the first place, then, he who would be
loved by his people should show himself a prince worthy of love; after
that it will do some good to consider how best he may win his way into
their hearts. {expediency+} The prince should do this first so that
the best men may have the highest regard for him and that he may be
accepted by those who are lauded by all. They are the men he should
have for his close friends; they are the ones for his counselors; they
are the ones on whom he should bestow his honors and whom he should
allow to have the greatest influence with him. By this means everyone
will come to have an excellent opinion of the prince, who is the
source of all good will. {fountain+} I have known some princes who
were not really evil themselves who incurred the hatred of the people
for no other reason than that they granted too much liberty to those
whom universal public sentiment condemned. The people judged the
character of the prince by these other men. {expediency+}

For my part, I should like to see the prince born and raised among
those people whom he is destined to rule, because friendship
{affable+} is created and confirmed most when the source of good will
is in nature itself. The common people shun and hate even good
qualities when they are unknown to them, while evils which are
familiar are sometimes loved. This matter at hand has a twofold
advantage to offer, for the prince will be more kindly disposed toward
his subjects and certainly more ready to regard them as his own. The
people on their part will feel more kindness in their hearts and be
more willing to recognize his position as prince. For this reason I am
especially opposed to the accepted [idea of] alliances of the princes
with foreign, particularly with distant, nations.

The ties of birth and country and a mutual spirit of understanding,
as. it were, have a great deal to do with establishing a feeling of
good will. A goodly part of this feeling must of necessity be lost if
mixed marriages confuse that native and

inborn spirit. But when nature has laid a foundation of mutual
affection, then it should be developed and strengthened by every other
means. When the opposite situation is presented, then even greater
energy must be employed to secure this feeling of good will by mutual
obligations and a character worthy of commendation. In marriage, the
wife at first yields entirely to the husband, and he makes a few
concessions to her and indulges her whims until, as they come really
to know one another, a firm bond unites them; so it should be in the
case of a prince selected from a foreign country. Mithridates learned
the languages of all the peoples over whom he ruled, and they were
said to be twenty in number./3 Alexander the Great,/4 however
barbarous the peoples with whom he was dealing, at once used to
imitate their ways and customs and by this method subtly worked
himself into their good graces. {AFFABLE+} Alcibiades has been praised
for the same thing./5 Nothing so alienates the affections of his
people from a prince as for him to take great pleasure in living
abroad, because then they seem to be neglected by him to whom they
wish to be most important. The result of this is that the people feel
that they are not paying taxes to a prince [L 592] (since the moneys
are spent elsewhere and totally lost as far as they are concerned) but
that they are casting spoils to foreigners. Lastly, there is nothing
more harmful and disastrous to a country, nor more dangerous for a
prince, than visits to faraway places, especially if these visits are
prolonged; for it was this, according to the opinion of everyone, that
took Philip from us and injured his kingdom no less than the war with
the Gelrii, which was dragged out for so many years. The king bee is
hedged about in the midst of the swarm and does not fly out and
away. The heart is situated in the very middle of the body. Just so
should a prince always be found among his own people.

There are two factors, as Aristotle 6 tells us in his Politics, which
have played the greatest roles in the overthrow of em-

----- 8 Aulus Gellius N. A. XVII. 17. 2; Valerius Maximus
VIII. 7. 16. On page 245 Erasmus gives the number as 22. 4
Cf. Plutarch A1ex. XLVII. 3. 5 Plutarch Alcibiades
XXIII. 3. Pol. V. 10.

pires. They are hatred and contempt. Good will is the opposite of
hatred; respected authority, of contempt. Therefore it will be the
duty of the prince to study the best way to win the former and avoid
the latter. Hatred is kindled by an ugly temper, by violence,
insulting language, sourness of character, meanness, and greediness;
it is more easily aroused than allayed. A good prince must therefore
use every caution to prevent any possibility of losing the affections
of his subjects. You may take my word that whoever loses the favor of
his people is thereby stripped of a great safeguard./7 On the other
hand, the affections of the populace are won by those characteristics
which, in general, are farthest removed from tyranny. They are
{virtuelist+} clemency, affability, fairness, courtesy, and
kindliness. This last is a spur to duty, especially if they who have
been of good service to the state, see that they will be rewarded at
the hands of the prince. Clemency inspires to better efforts those who
are aware of their faults, [B 458] while forgiveness extends hope to
those who are now eager to make recompense by virtuous conduct for the
shortcomings of their earlier life and provides the steadfast with a
happy reflection on human nature. Courtesy everywhere engenders love -
or at least assuages hatred. This quality in a great prince is by far
the most pleasing to the masses.

Contempt is most likely to spring from a penchant for the worldly
pleasures of lust, for excessive drinking and eating, and for fools
and clowns - in other words, for folly and idleness. {effeminacy+}
Authority is gained by the following varied characteristics: in the
first place wisdom, then integrity, self-restraint, seriousness, and
alertness+./8{virtuelist+} These are the things by which a prince
should commend himself, if he would be respected in his authority over
his subjects. Some have the absurd idea that if they make the greatest
confusion possible by their appearance, and dress with pompous
display, they must be held in high esteem among their subjects. Who
thinks a prince great just because he is adorned with gold and
precious stones? Everyone

----- 7 Cf. Isocrates To Nicocles 21. 8 Cf. Cicero De off. II. 9. 32,
33.{expediency+}

knows he has as many as he wants. But in the meanwhile what else does
the prince expose except the misfortunes of his people, who are
supporting his extravagance to their great cost? And now lastly, what
else does such a prince sow among his people, if not the seeds of all
crime? Let the good prince be reared in such a manner and [continue
to] live in such a manner that from the example of his life all the
others (nobles and commoners alike) may take the model of frugality
and temperance+. Let him so conduct himself in the privacy of his home
as not to be caught unawares by the sudden entrance of anyone. And in
public it is unseemly for a prince to be seen anywhere, unless always
in connection with something that will benefit the people as a
whole. The real character of the prince is revealed by his speech
rather than by his dress. Every word that is dropped from the lips of
the prince is scattered wide among the masses. He should exercise the
greatest care to see that whatever he says bears the stamp of
[genuine] worth and evidences a mind becoming a good prince.

Aristotle's/9 advice on this subject should not be overlooked. He says
that a prince who would escape incurring the hatred of his people and
would foster their affection for him should delegate to others the
odious duties and keep for himself the tasks which will be sure to win
favor. Thereby a great portion of any unpopularity will be diverted
upon those who carry out the administration, and especially will it be
so if these men are unpopular with the people on other grounds as
well. {expediency+} In the matter of benefits, however, the genuine
thanks redound to be prince alone. I should like to add also that
gratitude+ for a favor will be returned twofold if it is given
quickly+, with no hesitation, spontaneously, and with a few words of
friendly commendation. {alactrity+} If anything must be refused,
refusal should be affable+ and without offense. If it is necessary to
impose a punishment, some slight diminution of the penalty prescribed
by law should be made, and the sentence should be carried out as if
the prince were being forced [to act] against his own desires.

----- 9 Pol. V. 13.

It is not enough for the prince to keep his own character pure and
uncorrupted for his state. He must give no less serious attention, in
so far as he can, to see that every member of his household - his
nobles, his friends, his ministers, and his magistrates - follows his
example. They are one with the prince, and any hatred that is aroused
by their vicious acts rebounds upon the prince himself. But, someone
will say, this supervision is extremely difficult to accomplish. It
will be easy enough if the prince is careful to admit only the best
men into his household, and if he makes them understand that the
prince is most pleased by that which is best for the people. Otherwise
it too often turns out that, due to the disregard of the prince in
these matters or even his connivance in them, the most criminal men
(hiding under cover of the prince) force a tyranny upon the people,
and while they appear to be carrying out the affairs of the prince,
they are doing the greatest harm to his good name. What is more, the
condition of the state is more bearable when the prince himself is
wicked than when he has evil friends; we manage to bear up under a
single tyrant. Somehow or other the people can sate the greed of one
man without difficulty: it is not a matter of great effort to satisfy
the wild desires of just one man or to appease the vicious fierceness
of a single individual, but to content so many tyrants is a heavy
burden. The prince should avoid every novel idea in so far as he is
capable of doing so; for even if conditions are bettered thereby, the
very innovation is a stumbling block. The establishment of a state,
the unwritten laws of a city, or the old legal code are never changed
without great confusion. Therefore, if there is anything, of this sort
that can be endured, it should not be changed but should either be
tolerated or happily diverted to a better function. As a last resort,
if there is some absolutely unbearable condition, the change should be
made, but [only] gradually and by a practiced hand./10

The end which the prince sets for himself is of the greatest
consequence, for if he shows little wisdom in its selection he

----- 10 Cf. Aristotle Pol. II. 8.

must of necessity be wrong in all his plans. The cardinal principle of
a good prince should be not only to preserve the present prosperity of
the state but to pass it on more prosperous than when he received
it. To use the jargon of the Peripatetics, there are three kinds of
"good" - that of the mind, that of the body, and the external good./11
The prince must be careful not to evaluate them in reverse order and
judge the good fortune of his state mainly by the external good, for
these latter conditions should only be judged good in so far as they
relate to the good of the mind and of the body; that is, in a word,
the prince should consider his subjects to be most fortunate+ not if
they are very wealthy or in excellent bodily health but if they are
most honorable and self-controlled, if they have as little taste for
greed and quarreling as could be hoped for, and if they are not at all
factious but live in complete accord with one another. He must also
beware of being deceived by the false names of the fairest things, for
in this deception lies the fountainhead from which spring practically
all the evils that abound in the world. [B 459] It is no true state of
happiness in which the people are given over to idleness and wasteful
extravagance, any more than it is true liberty for everyone to be
allowed to do as he pleases. Neither is it a state of servitude to
live according to the letter of just laws. Nor is that a peaceful
state in which the populace bows to every whim of the prince; but
rather [is it peaceful] when it obeys good laws and a prince who has a
keen regard for the authority of the laws./12{justice+} Equity does
not lie in giving everyone the same reward, the same rights, the same
honor; as a matter of fact, that is sometimes a mark of the greatest
unfairness.

A prince who is about to assume control of the state must be advised
at once that the main hope of a state lies in the proper education of
its youth. This Xenophon/13 wisely taught in his Cyropaedia. Pliable
youth is amenable to any system of training. Therefore the greatest
care should be exercised over public and private schools and over the
education of the girls,

----- 11 Ibid., VII. 1; cf. Plato Laws Ill. 697; Phil. 48, 49;
Aristotle Ethics I. 8. 12 Cf. Plato Laws IV. 715. 13 Cyropaedia
I. 2. 2-14.

so that the children may be placed under the best and most trustworthy
instructors and may learn the teachings of Christ and that good
literature which is beneficial to the state./14 As a result of this
scheme of things, there will be no need for many laws or punishments,
for the people will of their own free will follow the course of right.

Education exerts such a powerful influence, as Plato/15 says, that a
man who has been trained in the right develops into a sort of divine
creature, while on the other hand, a person who has received a
perverted training degenerates into a monstrous sort of savage
beast. {great_book+} Nothing is of more importance to a prince than to
have the best possible subjects.

The first effort, then, is to get them accustomed to the best
influences, because any music has a soothing effect to the accustomed
ear, and there is nothing harder than to rid people of those traits
which have become second nature to them through habit. None of those
tasks will be too difficult if the prince himself adheres to the best
manners. [L 594] It is the essence of tyranny, or rather trickery, to
treat the common citizen as animal trainers are accustomed to treat a
savage beast: first they carefully study the way in which these
creatures are quieted or aroused, and then they anger them or quiet
them at their pleasure. This Plato/16 has painstakingly pointed
out. Such a course is an abuse of the emotions of the masses and is no
help to them. However, if the people prove intractable and rebel
against what is good for them, then you must bide your time and
gradually lead them over to your end, either by some subterfuge or by
some helpful pretence. {pragmatism+} This works just as wine does, for
when that is first taken it has no effect, but when it has gradually
flowed through every vein it captivates the whole man and holds him in
its power.

If sometimes the whirling course of events and public opinion beat the
prince from his course, and he is forced to obey

----- 14 Cf. Plato Laws VII. 794, 804, 813; Plato provides for the
education of girls as well as boys. 15 Laws VI. 766. 16 Rep. VI. 493.

the [exigencies of the] time, yet he must not cease his efforts as
long as he is able to renew his fight, and what he has not
accomplished by one method he should try to effect by another.

IV+. ON TRIBUTES AND TAXES


If anyone will merely glance through the annals of the ancients he
will discover that a great many seditions have arisen from immoderate
taxation. The good prince must be careful that the feelings of the
commoners be not aroused by such actions. He should rule without
expense if he possibly can. The position of the prince is too high to
be a mercenary one; and besides, a good prince has all that his loving
subjects possess. There were many pagans who took home with them only
glory+ as a result of their public activities which they had honorably
discharged. There were one or two (for example, Fabius_Maximus+ and
Antoninus_Pius+ who spurned even this./1 How much more should a
Christian prince be content with a clear conscience, especially since
he is in the service of Him who amply rewards every good deed! There
are certain ones in the circles of princes who do nothing else except
extort as much as possible from the people on every new pretext they
can find and then believe that they have properly served the interests
of their princes, as if they were the open enemies of their
subjects. But whoever is willing to hearken to such men, should know
that he by no means comes under the title of "prince"!

A prince should studiously endeavor to minimize his demands on the
people. The most desirable way of increasing the revenue is to cut off
the worse than useless extravagances, to abolish the idle ministries,
to avoid wars and long travels, which are very like wars [in their bad
effects], to suppress graft among the office holders, and to be
interested in the proper administration of the kingdom rather than in
the extension

----- 1 Cf. Ennius, quoted in Cicero De senec. IV. 10, and Scriptores
historiae Augustae, Ant. Pius 9. 10; 10. 1.

of its boundaries. But if the prince is going to measure the amount of
taxes by his greed or ambitions, what bounds or limits will there be
to his demands? Greed knows no end and continually presses and extends
what it has started until, as the old proverb/2 goes, too great a
strain breaks the rope, and finally the patience of the people is
exhausted and they break into an uprising, which is the very thing
that has been the undoing of kingdoms that once were most
prosperous. If, however, circumstances force the levying of taxes on
the people, then it is the part of a good prince to raise them
according to such a system that as little as possible of the hardships
will fall upon the poor. It is perhaps desirable to bring the wealthy
to a simple life, but to reduce the poor to starvation and chains is
most inhuman, as well as extremely dangerous. [B 460] The
conscientious king, at the time when he wants to increase his court,
to obtain an excellent alliance for his grand-daughter or his sister,
to raise all his children to rank with him, to fill the coffers of the
nobility, to flaunt his wealth in the face of other nations by
extended travels, should ponder again and again in his own mind how
inhuman it is for so many thousands of men with their wives and
children to starve to death, to be plunged into debt and driven to the
last degrees of desperation, so that he can accomplish these ends. I
should not even consider such persons under the class of human beings
- much less princes - when they extort from the lowest paupers what
they sinfully squander on lewd women and on gambling. And yet we hear
of some men who think that even such actions come under their rights.

The prince should also give a good deal of thought to this fact, that
whatever is once introduced as a temporary expedient and appears to be
connected with the purse strings of prince or nobles, can never be set
aside. When the occasion for the taxation is removed, not only should
the burden be removed from the people, but recompense made by
replacing, as far as possible, the former expenditures. He who has his

----- 2 Lucian Dialogi meretricii III. 286; quoted in Erasmus Adages
LXVII.

people's interests at heart will avoid introducing a calamitous
precedent; but if he takes pleasure in the disasters of his subjects,
or even disregards them, he is in no way a prince, regardless of his
title whatever it may be.

The prince should try to prevent too great an inequality of wealth. I
should not want to see anyone deprived of his goods, but the prince
should employ certain measures to prevent the wealth of the multitude
being hoarded by a few. Plato/3 did not want his citizens to be too
rich, neither did he want them extremely poor, for the pauper is of no
use and the rich man will not use his ability for public service.

It happens that princes like those [which I have just described] are
sometimes not even enriched by these levies. Whoever would like to
find out for himself has only to recall how much less our ancestors
received from their peoples and how much more beneficent they were and
how much more they possessed in every way, because a great part of
this money slips through the fingers of the collecting and receiving
agents and a very small portion gets to the prince himself.

A good prince will tax as lightly as possible those commodities which
are used even by the poorest members of society; e.g., grain, bread,
beer, wine, clothing, and all the other staples without which human
life could not exist. But it so happens that these very things bear
the heaviest tax in several ways; in the first place, by the
oppressive extortion of the tax farmers, commonly called assisiae,/4
then by import duties which call for their own set of extortionists,
and finally by the monopolies by which the poor are sadly drained of
their funds in order that the prince may gain a mere trifling
interest. As I have brought out, the best way of increasing the
prince's treasury is to follow the old proverb,/5 "Parsimony is a
great revenue," and carefully check expenditures. However, if some
taxation is absolutely necessary and the affairs of the

----- 3 Rep. IV. 421, 22; cf. also Aristotle Pol. IV. 11. 4 This word
(spelled asisiae by Erasmus) has many meanings; from the name of the
council which imposed a tax it came to mean the tax itself. Cf. Du
Cange Glossarium mediae et infimae latinitatis. 5 Quoted in Cicero
Parad. VI. 3. 49; Pseudo-Seneca Monita 22.

people render it essential, barbarous and foreign goods should be
heavily taxed because they are not the essentials of livelihood but
the extravagant luxuries and delicacies which only the wealthy enjoy;
for example, linen, silks, dyes, pepper, spices, unguents, precious
stones, and all the rest of that same category. But by this system
only those who can well afford it feel the pinch. They will not be
reduced to straightened circumstances as a result of this outlay but
perchance may be made more moderate in their desires so that the loss
of money may be replaced by a change for the better in their
habits. In the minting of his money the good prince should observe
that faith which he owes to God and his own people and not allow
himself a liberty by which he inflicts the direst penalties on
others. In this matter there are four ways of robbing the people, a
fact which was only too clearly brought before us at the death of
Charles, when a long period of anarchy more blighting than any tyranny
you could name afflicted your kingdom. The first way is to debase the
coinage with alloys, the second is to make them short weight, the
third is to clip them, and the fourth is to bring about intentional
fluctuation of value to suit the needs of the prince's treasury.

V+. ON THE BENEFICENCES OF THE PRINCE

[L 596] The appropriate honor for good princes comes from their
kindliness and their beneficence. {Off+} How, then, can some men claim
this title of "prince" for themselves, when they turn every thought to
the improvement of their own affairs and to the ruin of everyone
else. The mark of an ingenius and acute prince is [the ability] to
assist everyone by every means he has available - and that does not
merely mean by giving. Some he will help through his liberality, some
he will assist by his favor, some who are downtrodden he will free
from their difficulties, and some he will help by friendly advice. Let
him count that day lost, I say, on which he has benefited no
one. {Off+. 32ff}

Yet the prince's liberality should by no means be
promiscuous. {Off+. 53} There are some who heartlessly extort from the
good citizen what they squander on fools, court informers, and
panderers. Let the state see that the rewards of the prince are most
ready for those who have used every means to do good for the
state. Let merit, not fancy, be the basis for reward. [B 461] The
prince should be most liberal with those benefits which will cause no
hurt or injury to anyone, for to despoil some to enrich others, to
ruin one group to elevate another, is certainly no real benefit. It is
really a twofold source of evil, especially if anything be taken from
the deserving to be transferred to the unworthy.

In the mythical stories of the poets it has been truly shown that the
gods never made a visit to any place without conferring great benefit
upon those by whom they were received. But when on the arrival of a
prince his subjects hide any rather elaborate piece of furniture, keep
their comely daugh-

ters out of sight, Send away their young sons, lie about their wealth,
and in every way reduce their real position, is it not then
selfevident that they hold the same opinion of the prince as they
would hold of an invading enemy or a brigand, since on his arrival
they fear for those things which it should be his duty to protect if
there were any hidden plot or violence on foot? They fear treachery
from others, but from him they fear violence also, since one complains
that he has been beaten, another that his maiden daughter has been
stolen, another that his wife has been seduced, another that his
pittance has been withheld. What a tragic difference between the
picture of this arrival and that of the gods! Each of his cities holds
the prince under suspicion in direct proportion to its own prosperity;
on the coming of the prince the opportunists push themselves to the
fore and all of the worthy men of parts are on their guard and draw
away. Tacitly by their actions they show how they regard the
prince. Some one may say, "I cannot control the hands of all my court;
I am doing all I can." Let your followers know that you are inflexibly
firm in this matter. You will eventually get the people really to
believe that this is done against your will, but only if you do not
allow an offender to go unpunished. Perhaps it was enough for a pagan
prince to be kind to his own people and merely just to foreigners, but
it is the part of a Christian prince to regard no one as an outsider+
unless he is a nonbeliever, and even on them he should inflict no
harm. His own subjects should naturally come first in his thought, but
he should help everyone that he can.

Although the prince must ever try to see that no one suffers any harm,
still, according to Plato,/1 in the case of strangers he should be
even more careful than in the case of his own subjects to see that no
harm befalls them, for strangers are deprived of all their friends and
relatives and are consequently more susceptable to mishaps. For this
reason they are said to have Jupiter as their special protector, who
in this capacity was called "Xenius" [the wayfarer's god].

----- 1 Laws V. 729; cf. also Isocrates To Nicocles 22.

VI+.  ON ENACTING OR EMENDING LAWS


The best laws under the best princes make a city (civitas) or a
kingdom most fortunate. The most felicitous condition exists when the
prince is obeyed by everyone, the prince himself obeys the laws, and
the laws go back to the fundamental principles of equity and honesty,
with no other aim than the advancement of the commonwealth./1

A good, wise, and upright prince is nothing else than a sort of living
law. {Hal+} He will make it his effort to pass not many laws but the
best possible ones that will prove most beneficial to the state. A
very few laws suffice for a well organized state (civitas)/3 under a
good prince and honorable officials. Under any other conditions no
number, however great, will be enough. A sick person does not get
along best with an unskilled physician prescribing one medicine after
another.

In the promulgation of laws, the first concern is to see that they do
not savor of royal financial plans nor of private gain for the
nobility but that they are drawn up on an honest plan and that
everything looks to the welfare of the people. This welfare is to be
judged not by the popular opinion but according to the dictates of
wisdom, which should always be present in the councils of the
prince. Even the pagans admitted that a law is really no law at all if
it is not just, fair, and intended for public benefit. That is not a
law which merely pleases the prince, but rather that which pleases a
good and wise prince who has no interest in anything which is not
honorable and for

----- 1 Cf. Plato Laws IV, 715. 2 Cf. Aristotle Pol. III. 15; Plutarch
A Philosopher Is to Converse with Great Men 4; Cicero Laws II. 5. 11;
III. 1. 2; see also Suetonius Julius 77. 3 I have rendered civitas as
"city" the first time because it seemed to denote something different
from "kingdom"; in the second case, "state" seemed the more probable
meaning.

the good of his state. But if those standards by which evils are to be
corrected are themselves distorted, there can be only one result from
laws of this kind, namely, that even good things are perverted to
evil. Plato/4 desired that the laws should be as few as possible,
especially on the less important matters, such as agreements,
commercial business, and taxes; for no more benefit accrues to the
state from a mass of laws than would come [to a person] from a
multitude of medicines. When the prince is a man of unquestioned
character and the officials fulfill their responsibilities+, there is
no need of many laws. Under other conditions, however, the abuse of
the laws is turned into the destruction of the state, for even the
good laws are perverted into other meanings, due to the dishonesty of
these men.

Dionysus of Syracuse has been justly blamed for establishing most of
his laws according to a tyrannical scheme, heaping one upon the other
and then, as it turned out, allowing his people to disobey them so
that by this means he could make everyone liable to his
punishments. That is not law making, it is trapping.

Just condemnation has been brought on Epitadeus/5 who passed a law to
the effect that everyone should be free to leave his property to
anyone he wished. His one purpose in this was that he himself might
disinherit his son whom he hated. At first the people did not see
through the scheme of the man, but the act itself eventually brought
dire ruin on the state. [B 462] Let the prince propose such laws as
not only provide punishment in particular for the sources of crime but
also have influence against sin itself. Therefore, they are at fault
who think that laws should be framed in the briefest compass, to be
merely peremptory, not to instruct./5 The main purpose of law should
be to restrain crime by reason rather than by punishment. It is true,
however, that Seneca does not concur

----- 4 Rep. IV. 425-26. 5 Cf. Plutarch Agis and Cleomenes 5. 6
Cf. Plato Laws X. 890. 7 Seneca Ep. Mor. XCIV. 37 which agrees with
Plato's view. I cannot find a passage in Seneca which expresses the
opposite of this idea. This contradiction of fact and statement is
hard to explain; perhaps Erasmus has confused Seneca with someone
else, or there may be some passage which I have not located.

with Plato in his idea on this subject, but his dissent is a mark of
daring rather than enlightenment.

Furthermore, young men should not be allowed to argue [at all] on the
justice of the laws, and the older men but sparingly./8 It is not the
part of the common people to criticize rashly the laws of princes, but
it is the province of the prince to see that he makes laws which will
please all good citizens. He should remember that even the lowest
members of society have some appreciation./9 M. Antoninus Pius has
been praised because he never promulgated any law which he did not try
to justify to all by accompanying letters, in which he gave the
reasons why he judged the measure expedient for the state./10
Xenophon/11 has cleverly set forth in his Oeconomicus that all other
animals [except man], are mainly brought to obedience by [three]
means: by food, if they are of the lower sort; by fondling if they are
more intelligent, like the horse; or by beating if they are stubborn,
like the ass. But since man is the highest of all animals, [L 598] he
ought not to be so much coerced by threats and blows, as led to his
duty by rewards. The laws should then not only provide punishments for
the transgressors but also by means of rewards stimulate good conduct
in the service of the state. We find many examples of this type among
the ancients: whoever fought bravely in war, hoped for a reward; if he
fell fighting, his children were reared by the state. Whoever saved a
fellow citizen, whoever drove one of the enemy from the walls, whoever
assisted the state by wise counsel, had his reward+.

Although a good citizen should follow the path of honor even when no
reward is offered, still inducements of that sort are desirable to
spur on to an eagerness for good living the minds of those citizens
who are still but little developed. Those who have more character are
more interested in the honor; those who are on a lower level are
influenced by the money also.

----- 8 Cf. Plato Laws 1. 634. 9 Cf. ibid., III. 684. If Erasmus had
this passage in mind, he carefully omits reference to Plato's
refutation of the statement. 10 Scriptores historiae Augustae,
Ant. Pius 12. 3. 11 Oecon. XIII. 6-10.

A law should have its effect, then, in all these ways - honor and
disgrace, profit and loss. Of course those who really are of a
servile, or rather, beastial, character must be controlled by chains
and floggings. Let your subjects grow up from childhood with this
sense of honor and ignominy so that they will realize that rewards are
not won through wealth or birth, but by good deeds. In a word, the
watchful prince should use every means not only to see that offenses
are punished but to look and reach much further back than that. He
should see in the first place that no deed is committed which calls
for punishment. The better physician is the one who prevents and wards
off disease, not the one that cures the disease with drugs once it is
contracted. Just so, it is not a little the more worthwhile
achievement to prevent the inception of crime than to inflict
punishment once crime is committed. The former will be accomplished if
the prince will discover the causes from which most crimes spring and
then cut them out if he can, or at any rate, suppress them and deprive
them of their force.

First, then, the majority of crimes arise, as I have said, from
polluted ideas, as if from poisoned springs. Your first course is to
have your subjects grounded in the best principles, and secondly, to
have as your officials men who are not only wise but also
incorruptible. Plato/12 is right in his advice that nothing should be
left untried and, as the saying goes, no stone left unturned before
making use of the supreme penalty. Try by teaching to prevent the
desire to sin, then try to stop [the backsliders] by [arousing] a fear
of that divinity which takes vengeance on criminals and also by the
threat of punishment. If no headway is made by these means, recourse
must be had to punishments but only to those of the lighter sort which
remedy the evil and do not destroy the whole being. As a last resort,
if none of these efforts are fruitful, the incorrigible must be
sacrificed by the law (just as a hopelessly incurable limb must be
amputated) so that the sound part is not affected. {clemency+}

A reliable and skilled physician never resorts to an operation or
cauterizes if he can stop the malady by plasters and

----- 12 Laws V. 731; cf. ibid., IX. 862; Rep. III. 409-10.

ON ENACTING OR EMENDING LAWS <Eras-225> strong medicines; and he never
resorts even to those unless forced to do so by [the seriousness of]
the disease. So a prince should try every remedy before resorting to
capital punishment, keeping in mind that the state is a single
body. No one cuts off a limb if [the patient] can be restored to
health by any other means./13 The honest physician has only one
purpose in mind when he prepares his remedies and that is how to
overcome the ailment with the very least danger to the patient; so it
is with the good prince in passing laws. He has no other end in view
than the advantage of his people and the remedying of their
misfortunes with the least disturbance.

A goodly part of crime arises from the one fact that everywhere wealth
is exalted and poverty is scorned. The prince will therefore make an
effort to see that his subjects are rated according to their worth and
character rather than their material wealth. He should exemplify this
first in himself and in his household. If the people see the prince
flaunting his riches, observe that with him the man who has the most
money is rated the highest, and that money opens the way to
magistracies, honors, and official positions, is it surprising that
these injustices arouse the efforts of the masses to win wealth by
fair means or foul?

Now, to speak in more general terms, [B 463] the great mass of the
worthless crowd in every state is created throughidleness+, which they
all seek in different ways. Those who have once become accustomed to
[an idle] life will resort to any evil course, if they have no other
means of supporting it. The prince will therefore always be on the
lookout to keep the proportion of idlers down to the minimum among his
courtiers, and either force them to be busy or else banish them from
the country. {effeminacy+}

Plato/14 thinks that all beggars should be driven far from the
boundaries of his state. But if there are any persons who are broken
through old age or sickness and without any relatives to care for
them, they should be cared for in public insti-

----- 13 cf. Seneca De clementia I. 16. 2-4. 14 Laws XI. 936.

tutions for the aged and the sick. Anyone who is well and content with
little will have no need to beg.

The people of Marseilles did not admit into their city those priests
who travel from town to town peddling pseudo-relics, so that under the
guise of religion they might enjoy ease and luxury. Perhaps it would
be to the advantage of the state if the number of monasteries+ were
limited, for in them is found a peculiar form of idleness, especially
among those whose lives have little to be said for them and are spent
in a lazy and sluggish fashion. What I say about monasteries, is also
true of colleges. {effeminacy+}

To this class [i.e., the idlers] belong also contractors, street
peddlers, money lenders, brokers, procurers, caretakers of country
establishments, wardens of game preserves, and that troop of servants
and attendants that some men keep in their service because of their
ambitious pretenses. When they cannot get the things which extravagant
waste, the companion of laziness, demands, they resort to wicked
practices. And in the military service there is a busy sort of time
wasting, and it is by far the most destructive, for from it result the
complete cessation of everything worth while and the source of all
things evil. {Falstaff+} If the prince will strike out these seed beds
of crime from his kingdom, he will have much less to punish by law. I
should merely like to add in passing that useful occupation should be
respected and sluggish indolence not graced with the title "nobility."
I should not strip the wellborn of their honors if they follow in the
footsteps of their forefathers and excel in those qualities which
first created nobility. But if we see so many today who are soft from
indolence, effeminate+ through sensual pleasures, with no knowledge of
any useful vocation, but only charming table fellows, ardent gamesters
(I will not mention any of their obscene practices) why, I ask you,
why should this class of persons be placed on a higher level than the
shoemaker or the farmer? In former times leisure from the baser
activities was granted the best families, not so that they might
indulge in wanton nonsense, but so that they might learn the
principles of government.

ON ENACTING OR EMENDING LAWS <Eras-227>

Let it then be no disgrace if the wealthy citizen or descendants of
the old families teach their sons a sedentary vocation.{trade+} In the
first place, while the young men are engaged in such a study they will
be restrained from many vices; in the second place, if there is no
need to use their training, it burdens no one. But if they suffer
reverses (such is the fickleness of man's fortune), then, according to
the proverb, any land or any position will give opportunity for their
trade.

The ancients, realizing that most evils arose from extravagant
prodigality, passed sumptuary laws and created the office of censor to
restrain immoderate expenditures on banquets, dress, or building./15
Some one may think it is a severe course that does not allow a person
to use or abuse his own possessions in accordance with his own
unrestrained whims. Let him reflect that it is much worse for the
morals of his subjects to become so depraved through this sort of
extravagance that capital punishment is necessary. It is more in
keeping for one to be forced into frugality than to be forced into
utter ruin by vice. There is nothing less helpful than for moneys to
accrue to officials as a result of the offenses of the citizens; for
who will turn his attention to reduce crime to the minimum, when it is
to his advantage to have as many criminals as possible. It is an
equitable arrangement, and one in common practice among the ancients,
that fines should go largely to the injured party, then partly to the
public treasury, and in the case of more outrageous crimes partly to
the informer. This matter of outrage, however, must be adjudged in
accordance with the harm done the state, not according to anyone's
private prejudices. {friend_judge+}{Off+ I 88,89} The laws should see
in the main that no wrong is done any man, be he poor or rich, noble
or commoner, servant or slave, official or private citizen. But they
should lean more in the direc-

----- 15 There were numerous sumptuary laws passed from time to time
at Rome, and many of these were mentioned by writers with whom Erasmus
was thoroughly conversant (e.g,, Dio Cassius, Aulus Gellius,
Macrobius, Valerius Maximus, and Suetonius). On the subject see
Daremberg-Saglio, Dictionnaire des antiquitis grecques et romaines,
s. v. sumptus, and Pauly-Wissowa, Real- encyclopddie der classischen
Altertumswissenschaft, s. v. sumptus.  tion of leniency to the weaker,
for the lot of those in the lower stations is more exposed to
injuries. What is lacking in the protection of fortune, that the
humanity of your laws should equalize. Let them, then, punish more
severely an outrage on a poor man than an offense against a rich man,
and provide a heavier penalty for a corrupt official than for a
faithless plebian, for the crimes of a man of rank than for those of a
commoner.

According to Plato/16 there are two kinds of penalty. The first is a
penalty not too severe in proportion to the offense committed
(consequently the supreme penalty must not be resorted to except after
careful thought), for the seriousness of the crime must be judged not
by our own eager desires [L 600] but on the basis of justice and
honesty. Why is it that everywhere simple theft is punished by death
and adultery goes almost unscathed (which is in direct contradiction
to the laws of all the ancients), unless with everyone money is held
in too high esteem and its loss is measured not by the facts but by
their own feelings? But this is not the place to reason out why at the
present time there is little disturbance made against adulterers,
while formerly the laws were very severe against them. The second
class [of penalties] which Plato designates as exemplary, [B 464]
should but rarely be resorted to, and then should only be employed in
such a way that all other men are restrained rather by the uniqueness
of the penalty than by its enormity, for there is nothing so awful but
that it is held in contempt through long familiarity. Nothing does
less good than to make your subjects accustomed to punishments.

In treating a disease, new remedies are not tried if the malady can be
cured by old ones. Just so new laws should not be enacted if the old
ones will suffice to remedy the troubles of the state./17 If useless
laws cannot be repealed without causing a great deal of confusion,
they should little by little be allowed to fall into disuse or else
should be emended. It is a dangerous procedure to recast the laws
promiscuously, but it is

----- 16 Laws IX. 862. 17 Cf. Aristotle Pol. II. 8.

necessary to suit the remedy to the condition of the body and likewise
the laws to the present condition of the state. Therefore certain
institutions that were once beneficial are [now] better repealed.

Many laws have been established with the best intentions but have been
perverted to dishonorable uses by the wickedness of officials. Nothing
is more ruinous than a just law which has been perverted to evil
purposes. No possible loss to his purse should deter the prince from
abolishing or emending such laws, for there is no gain which is not
linked with a loss of honor, especially when the laws are in such a
condition that their repeal will be readily applauded. Do not let the
prince deceive himself, if such laws have become strongly established
in some places and have become deeply rooted through long custom. Mere
numbers in approval do not make for the justice of a measure, and the
more deeply rooted an evil is, the more diligently should it be pulled
out. I should like to mention one or two examples. It is the practice
in some places for the prefect to take over in the king's name the
effects of a deceased foreigner. That practice was started as a good
measure to prevent those who had no right to the stranger's property
from claiming it, and it remained in the hands of the prefect until
the rightful heirs appeared. But now that [situation] has become
disgracefully distorted, so that the property of a foreigner reverts
to the treasury whether there be heirs or not.

That was once a good practice [which provided] that whatever was found
on a thief was seized by the prince or an officer acting in his name
to prevent, of course, the fraudulent assignation to an illegitimate
owner, as would be the case if there were an indiscriminate right to
claim it. As soon as the rightful owner was identified, the property
was to be restored to him. But now there are some people who believe
that whatever they find on a thief belongs to them just as much as if
it had come to them by inheritance. Even they who do [so believe] are
perfectly conscious that it is grossly unjust, but the sense of right
is overcome by the desire for gain.

Long ago there was an excellent plan for the establishment

on the borders of the various kingdoms of officials who were to
supervise the imports and exports, with the special purpose of
guaranteeing passage safe from highwaymen to merchants and
travelers. The result was that if anything was stolen within the
confines of his territory, every prince saw to it that the merchant
suffered no loss and that the robber did not go completely free. It
was perhaps as a matter of courtesy that the merchants started to give
a small fee. But as it is now, everywhere the traveler is stopped for
his custom fee, the stranger is bothered by it, the merchants are
fleeced, and although the tax mounts from day to day, there is no
suggestion of protecting these peoples. The result is that the purpose
for which this institution was created is now completely lost and a
measure that was beneficial in its first stages has been completely
transformed into a tyrannical institution by the vicious practices of
public officers.

There was in the past a law enacted that all property cast up from a
shipwreck should be held by the prefect of marine affairs. This was
not done so that this property should fall into his or the prince's
possession, but so as to prevent it from being claimed by people
without just title. It only became state property if no one appeared
with proper claim. But now in some places, the prefect, more
unrelenting than the sea itself, seizes upon whatever is lost by any
cause at sea as if it were his own. What the storm has left the poor
wretches, this official, like a second tempest, sweeps away from them.

See how everything has gone wrong. The thief is punished because he
has stolen another man's property. But the magistrate who is appointed
to prevent theft steals it over again, and the owner is robbed a
second time by him who was appointed for the specific purpose of
preventing loss to anyone. The merchant traders are harassed and
plundered most by those who were expressly created to prevent the
traveler from being annoyed and robbed. And those very men whom the
law stablished to see that property does not rest in illegal possesion
are the ones who prevent its reaching the rightful owner. There are
many provisions like these among many nations

which are no less unjust than injustice itself. It is not the purpose
of this treatise to change any particular state. These practices are
common to substantially all states, and they have been condemned by
the judgment of everyone. I have brought them up for purposes of
instruction. Of course there may be some of these institutions which
could not be set aside without great confusion, but their abolition
would win favor for the prince and a good reputation, which should
seem greater than any pecuniary gain.

Nothing should be more democratic or just than the prince; [B 465] so
with the law. Under any other conditions, you will have the situation
which the Greek philosopher/18 well stated: "Laws are merely spider
webs, which the birds, being larger, break through with ease, while
the flies are caught fast."

The law, like the prince, should always be more prone to pardon than
to punish, either because it is more nearly according to the law of
God - for His anger is but very slowly stirred to vengeance - or
because a criminal who escapes can be brought back for punishment, but
no help can be given an innocent man who has been condemned./19 Even
if he [the innocent man] does not lose his life, who can judge the
suffering of another?

We read that there were formerly rulers (not princes, but tyrants)
from whose example the Christian prince should be as different as
possible, for they judged the crimes that were committed according to
their own private discomfiture. Consequently, to them it was only a
petty theft when a poor man was stripped of his goods and along with
his wife and children driven into chains or beggary; but it was a very
serious matter, deserving of all the tortures, if anyone defrauded the
privy purse or a grasping collector of a penny. Likewise they would
cry out that slander had been brought on their majesty if anyone
should murmur against even the wickedest prince, or should speak a bit
too freely of an oppressive official. Even the emperor Hadrian, a
pagan and not to be classed among

----- 18 Anacharsis, quoted in Plutarch Solon V. 2, 3; Valerius
Maximus VII. 2. 14. 19 Cf. Plutarch God Is Slow to Punish 5.

the good princes, would never listen to a charge of lese-majeste; "
and not even that cruel monster Nero gave much heed to secret
accusation on that charge./21 There was another one/22 who paid no
attention at all to charges of this sort and said, "In a free country,
tongues likewise should be free." Therefore, there are no crimes which
a good prince will pardon more readily or more gladly than those which
affect him alone. Who can scorn such trivial things more easily than
the prince? It is easy for him to take vengeance and therefore hateful
and unbecoming. Vengeance+ is a proof of a small, weak character; and
nothing is less appropriate in a prince, who should be generous and
magnanimous./23 It is not enough for the prince to be clear of all
crime; he should be untainted by any suspicion or appearance of
crime. For this reason he will not only carefully weigh the deserts of
him who commits a crime against the prince but also the opinions of
others concerning the prince, and out of respect for his own position
he will sometimes pardon an unworthy man and with a thought for his
own reputation will be lenient to those who deserve no clemency. Do
not let anyone cry out at once that this idea shows too little thought
for the majesty of princes which with the greatest care should be kept
sacrosanct and inviolate by the state. There is no other way, on the
contrary, by which to look out for the greatness of the prince than
for the people to understand that he is so alert that nothing escapes
him; so wise that he understands what things comprise the real majesty
of a prince; so lenient that he avenges no injury to himself, unless
the good of the state calls for it. The majesty of Caesar Augustus was
enhanced and made safer by the clemency extended to Cinna+, when so
many punishments had gained nothing./24 He is really guilty of injury
to the prince's majesty who cuts down that in which the prince's true
greatness lies. The

----- 2O Scriptores historiae Augustae, Hadrian 18. 4, 5. 21 Suetonius
Nero 39. 22 Tiberius, in Suetonius Tib. 28. 23 Cf. Seneca De clementia
I. 5. 4; I. 20.3. 24 Seneca De clementia I. 9.

prince's greatness is in the quality of his character and in the
affairs of his people that are prospering through his wisdom. Whoever
destroys these factors is to be accused of lese-majeste. They go far
astray and have no real conception of the real majesty of the prince,
who think that it is increased when the laws are reduced to a minimum
of effectiveness and the liberty of the people is broken, [L 602] as
if the prince and the state were two separate entities. But if a
comparison is to be made between the things which nature has united,
the king should not compare himself with anyone of his subjects that
he pleases but with the whole body of the state; for thus he will see
how much more important the latter is, embodying so many men and
women, than the prince alone, who is the head. The state will be a
state,/25 even if there be no prince. Even the greatest dominions
prospered without a prince; for example, the republics of Rome and
Athens. But a prince cannot exist without a state; in other words, a
state carries with it the idea of a prince, but the reverse does not
hold. What is that which alone makes a prince, if it is not the
consent of his subjects? A man who is great because of his own good
qualities, that is, his virtues, will be great even if his princely
authority is stripped from him. It is perfectly plain, then, that they
who measure the position of a prince by those things which are
unworthy of the high position of a prince are very wrong in their
judgment. He is called a "traitor" (for this is accepted to be the
most hated epithet) who by his frank advice recalls the prince to a
better course when he has swerved to those interests which are neither
becoming nor safe for himself nor beneficial to the state
(patria). Surely he is not looking out for the position of the prince,
is he, who corrupts the prince with plebeian ideas, leads him into
disgraceful worldly pleasures, into wild feasts, into gambling, and
into other disgraceful diversions of that sort? It is called "loyalty"
to flatter a stupid prince by ready obsequiousness, but "treason" to
block any of these wicked plans. On the contrary, no one is

----- 25 The Latin term here is respublica, as elsewhere; not civitas,
the technical, "sovereign state."

[in reality] less a friend to the prince than the man who by base
flattery+ deludes him and takes him from the course of right, who
involves him in wars, who advocates robbery of his people, who teaches
him the art of tyranny, who makes him hateful to every good man. Such
conduct is real treason and deserves more than one punishment.

Plato/26 wanted his gardiens des lois, that is, those who were placed
in charge of the laws, to be absolutely trustworthy. A good prince
should punish none more severely than those who are corrupt in their
administration of the laws, since the prince himself is the first
guardian of the laws. It is advisable, then, that the laws be as few
as possible, and secondly, that they be as just as possible, and
[prepared] with a view to the welfare of the state; [B 466] in
addition they should be very thoroughly familiar to the people. On
this very account the ancients used to exhibit the laws publicly
written in the records and on tablets so that they might be plainly
discernible by all./27 Some follow the abominable theory of using the
law in place of nets with the one purpose of catching as many as they
can, with no regard for the state, but just as if they were capturing
spoils. Finally, let the laws be set forth in clear language with as
few complexities as possible, so that there will be no urgent need for
that most grasping type of man who calls himself "jurisconsult" and
"advocate." This profession was once open only to men of the highest
standing and carried with it a very high position and very little
money. But now the lust for gold which has sapped everything has
corrupted this field. Plato/28 says that there can be no enemy more
blighting to the state than the person who subjects the laws to the
human will. But the laws are at the peak under a good prince. {Hal+}

----- 26 Rep. VI. 484. The text of Erasmus reads volAocp@@axeg. 27
Cf. Plato Laws XI. 917. 28 Laws IV. 715.

VII+.  ON MAGISTRATES AND THEIR FUNCTIONS


The prince should demand the same integrity which he himself exhibits,
or at any rate the closest approximation to it, from his officials. He
should not consider it enough to have appointed his magistrates, but
it is a matter of prime importance how he appoints them. In the second
place, he must be on the watch to see that they perform their duties
honorably. Aristotle/1 wisely and with deliberation gives us the
advice that good laws are passed to no purpose unless they are
defended by those who passed them. The very opposite sometimes has
happened, and laws that were enacted with the loftiest purpose were
turned to the complete ruin of the state through the vicious practices
of the magistrates.

Although the magistrates should not be selected on the basis of wealth
or family or age, but rather on that of wisdom and integrity, yet it
is more appropriate that older men should be selected for those
offices on which the safety of the state depends. This is not only
because older men possess more prudence as a result of their
experience and their personal feelings are more restrained but also
because among the people their advanced years give them some
authority./2 Accordingly Plato/3 laid down the rule that no one who
was less than fifty years old, or more than seventy, should be made a
custodian of the law. He would not have a priest less than
sixty. After the richest maturity of life there is a decline to which
is due a release and relaxation from all duties.

A chorus dance is a delightful spectacle if it is developed in rhythm
and harmony. On the other hand, it is a farce when the gestures and
voices are a confused jumble. So a city

----- 1 Pol IV. 8. 2 Cf. Olato Rep III. 409. Laws VI. 755

(civitas) or a kingdom is a wonderful thing if each [citizen] has his
own place, if each one performs his own peculiar duties, that is, if
the prince conducts himself as he should, if the magistrates are
faithful to their parts, and if the common folk yield obedience to
good laws and honorable magistrates. But when the prince looks out for
his own business and the magistrates do nothing but fleece the people,
when the common people do not obey fair laws, but only flatter the
prince and officials, whatever the matter may be, then there is sure
to be a disgraceful lack of order in everything. The first and prime
interest of the prince should be to see how he can be of most service
to his state. There is no better way of showing this service than by
being careful to see that the magistrates and offices are filled by
men of the best character and with the greatest interest in the public
welfare. {Hal+}

What is the prince but the physician of the state? It is not enough
for a physician to have skilled assistants if he himself is not most
adept and alert. Likewise it is not enough for the prince to have
trusted magistrates if he is not the most honorable of all, for
through him the others are selected and corrected.

The parts of the mind are not all equal in importance - some control,
others obey. The body only obeys. As the prince is the most important
part of the state he ought to know most and be farthest divorced from
all gross passions. Closest to him will be the magistrates, who obey
in part and rule in part, for they obey the prince and rule over the
common people. Therefore the prosperity of the state is closely
associated with the honest creation of the magistrates and the honest
apportionment of officers. Let there be in addition an action against
malpractice in office, just as there was in antiquity an action
against extortion. And finally, let there be the severest penalty
inflicted on these men if they are convicted.

The magistrates will be honestly created if the prince will select not
those who pay the most nor those who bribe most disgracefully nor
those who are closely related to him nor those who especially suit his
habits, whims, and fancies but

those who have the most reputable characters and are most adapted to
the performance of the specific duties required. {Hal+} But when the
prince does just one thing and that is to sell his offices to the
highest bidders, what else can he expect from them except that they
sell the offices over again, replenish their own loss by any means
whatsoever and commercialize their administration just as they did
their private businesses. And this practice should not seem less
ruinous to the state, merely because by a lamentable custom it has
been received by a great many nations, although it was considered a
disgrace even among the pagans, and the laws of the Caesars directed
those who presided over courts to have a princely salary so they would
have no excuse for graft./4 [B 467] At one time it was a very serious
crime to give a corrupt judgment, but on what basis can the prince
punish a judge who, after a bribe, has given a judgment or has refused
to give one, when he himself sold the position on the bench and taught
the future judge his corrupt ways? The prince's relation to the
magistrates should be that which he wishes them to have toward the
common people.

Aristotle/5 gives us the prudent advice in his Politics that above all
else we are to be on guard lest the magistrates gain from the
magistracies. Otherwise a double evil will result: the first is that
all the avaricious and dishonest men will bribe, or rather seize upon
and literally take possession of, the office, and [secondly] that the
people will be wracked between the two misfortunes of being not only
shut out from [attainment to] honor, but also robbed of their money.

----- 4 Cf. Dio Cassius LII. 23; LIII. 15. 5 Pol. V. 8.

VIII+. ON TREATIES

[L 604] In concluding treaties, as in everything else, the good prince
should look to nothing but the advantage of his people. But when the
opposite is done, when the prince considers it more to his advantage
that the interests of his people have been reduced, then it is not a
treaty, but a conspiracy. Whoever are of this opinion make two people
out of one - the nobles and the commoners, one of whom profits by the
other's loss. When that situation exists, there is no state. Among all
Christian princes there is at once a very firm and holy bond because
of the very fact that they are Christian. Why, then, is there a need
to conclude so many treaties every day as if everyone were the enemy
of everyone else and human agreements were essential to gain what
Christ could not [accomplish] ? When a matter is transacted through
many written agreements, it is a proof that it is not done in the best
faith and we often see it happen that many lawsuits arise as a result
of these agreements which were prepared for the very purpose of
preventing litigation. When good_faith+ is {Off+ passim} a party and
the business is between honest men, there is no need for many
painstaking contracts+. When the transaction is between dishonest men
and not made in good faith, these very agreements produce grounds for
suit. Likewise among good and wise princes, even if there is no
treaty, there is an established friendship; but among stupid and
wicked princes those very treaties into which they entered to prevent
the outbreak of war are the causes of war, for some one complains that
this or that clause among the countless articles has been violated. A
treaty is usually prepared to set an end to war, but at the present
time an agreement that starts a war is called a treaty.  These
alliances are nothing but war measures, and wherever the situation
looks best, there treaties are arranged.

The good_faith+ of princes is [shown by] their fulfillment of the
duties they accepted, so that a mere promise from them is more sacred
than an oath from anyone else. How base it is then not to live up to
those agreements which they made in solemn treaty, with those
ceremonies included in which are the most sacred of all among
Christians? And yet we see this happen every day through somebody's
fault. I do not know anything more about it, but it certainly cannot
happen except by the fault of some one. If any portion of a treaty
appears to have been broken, we should not at once conclude that the
whole pact is invalidated, lest we seem to have pounced upon an excuse
for breaking off friendly relations. On the contrary, we should rather
strive to patch up the breach with the least trouble possible. It is
advantageous sometimes even to overlook some points, since not even
among private individuals do agreements long remain in effect, if they
carry out everything to the letter, as the saying goes. You should not
at once follow the dictates of anger but rather that for which the
need of the state (publica utilitas) calls. {expediency+} A good and
wise prince will make an effort to preserve peace with everyone but
especially with his neighbors; for if they are wrought up they can do
a great deal of harm, while if they are friendly they are a big help,
and without their mutual business relations the state could not even
exist./1 Friendship easily arises and becomes fixed among those who
have a common tongue, who are geographically close, and who have
similar characteristics and traits. There is so great a difference in
everything between some nations that it is far wiser to have refrained
from relations with them than to be bound by even the stoutest
treaties. Some are so far away that even if they were well inclined
they could be of no assistance. Then there are some that are so surly,
untrustworthy, and arrogant that even though they are close at hand
yet they are worthless as friends. With them the wisest course will be
neither to break in war nor to be bound to them in any

----- 1 Cf. Aristotle Pol VII. 14.

close ties of treaties or alliances, because war is always disastrous
and the friendship of some peoples is hardly more bearable than war.

A part of the wisdom of a ruler lies in his knowledge of the traits
and characters of all peoples. {Hal+} This he will gain partly from
books, and partly from the memories of wise and experienced men. He
need not think that it will be necessary for him to wander over all
lands and seas as Ulysses did. For the other things, it is not easy to
set down a definite rule. In general it may be said that the prince
should not be too closely allied to those who differ from us in
religion, as, for example, the heathens; or those whom the foresight
of nature separated from us by mountains or seas, or those whom vast
stretches of land cut off from us. These we should not ally with nor
should we attack them. [B 468] Although there are many examples of
this very point, yet one from close at hand will be enough. France is
obviously by far the most prosperous of all countries, but it would be
much more flourishing if it had refrained from attacking Italy.

IX+.  ON THE MARRIAGE ALLIANCES OF PRINCES


For my part, I should think that it would be by far most beneficial to
the state if the marriage alliances of princes were confined within
the limits of their own kingdoms or, if they had to go beyond their
boundaries, with only their nearest neighbors and then only those who
warrant faithful friendship. But, they say, it is not right for the
daughter of a king to marry anyone except a king or a king's
son. Those are merely the fancies of individuals to raise their own
kin to as high a position as they can, and the prince should have no
sympathy with them at all. Suppose the sister of a king marries one
who is less powerful? What of it if it is more felicitous to everyone?
The disregard for the dignity of his sister's marriage will bring the
prince more prestige than if he sacrificed the advantage of his people
to the desires of a mere_woman+. The marriage of princes is really a
private matter of their own. It is called the greatest of human
affairs, so that we too often have a recurrence of what happened to
the Greeks and the Trojans because of Helen. But if you please to make
a choice becoming a prince, your wife should be selected from all
women for her integrity, modesty, and wisdom, and [she should be] one
who would be an obedient wife to a good prince and would bear him
children worthy both of their parents and the state (patria). She is
honorable enough, whatever her birth, who will make a good wife for
the good prince. It is admitted that nothing is so important to
everyone as that a prince should warmly love his people and be loved
by them in return. {love_fear+} Common characteristics of body and
mind, a sort of native essence which a deep affinity of character
develops, is of major interest to the country; but a great part of
this must of course be destroyed if marriages between differ-

ent peoples confuse all these factors. It could hardly be expected
that the state (patria) would wholeheartedly recognize children born
of such alliances, or that such children would be lastingly devoted to
the state (patria). Yet the common opinion is that these are the
adamantine bonds of public harmony, although the very facts show that
the greatest upheavals of human affairs spring from this source. One
[prince] complains that something or other in the betrothal contract
has been broken; another takes offense at something and withdraws the
bride; a third changes his mind, renounces his first intention, and
marries another. One thing or another is always making trouble. But
what does the state get out of all this? If the mutual alliances of
princes would give peace to the world, I should wish each of them to
have six hundred wives. What was gained a few years ago by the
alliance of King James of Scotland, since he invaded England with his
hostile forces? It sometimes happens that after long violent wars,
after countless disasters, a marriage is finally arranged and the
matter settled, but only after both parties are worn out from
misfortunes. Princes must strive to bring about a lasting peace among
all peoples and direct their common plans to this end. Although
marriages may secure peace, they certainly cannot make it perpetual;
for as soon as one of the pair dies, the bond of accord is broken. If,
however, peace is established on real grounds, then it will be fixed
and lasting. Someone will say that the rearing of children will cement
the bonds forever. Why, then, is there most fighting among those who
are most closely related? [L 606] Why? From these children come the
greatest changes of kingdoms, for the right to rule is passed from one
to another: something is taken from one place and added to
another. From these circumstances can come only the most serious and
violent consequences; the result then, is not an absence of wars, but
rather the cause of making wars more frequent and more atrocious; for
while one kingdom is allied to another through marriage, whenever
anyone is offended he uses his right of relationship to stir up the
others. As a result, a great part of the Christian world is at once
called to arms over a trivial offense, and the petty anger of a single
individual is placated by a tremendous shedding of Christian blood. I
shall advisedly refrain from example so as not to offend anyone.

In a word, by alliances of this sort the sway of princes is perhaps
increased, but the affairs of their people are weakened and
shattered. A good prince does not consider his own affairs prosperous
unless he looks out for the welfare of the state. I shall not talk
about the heartless effect (the result of these alliances) on the
girls themselves, who are sometimes sent away into remote places to
[marry] men who have no similarity of language, appearance, character,
or habits, just as if they were being abandoned to exile. They would
be happier if they could live among their own people, even though with
less pompous display. Although I am aware that this custom is too long
accepted for one to hope to be able to uproot it, yet I thought it
best to give my advice in case things should turn out beyond my hopes.

[B 469] The prince who has been instructed in the teachings of Christ
and in a protecting wisdom will consider nothing dearer (or rather,
nothing dear at all) than the prosperity of his people, whom he ought
to love and care for as king and member of one body. All his plans,
all his efforts, all his interests will be turned to the one aim of
ruling over the province entrusted to him in such a manner that when
Christ makes the final reckoning he will win approval and leave a very
honorable memory of himself among all his fellow men. Whether the
prince be at home or traveling, let him imitate the famous and
admirable Scipio,/1 who said he was never less alone than when he was
by himself, or less idle than when at leisure, for whenever he was
free from the cares of the state, he was always going over in his mind
some plans for the welfare or position of the state. Let him imitate
Vergil's Aeneas, whom the wise poet/2 depicts often turning over many
problems in his mind during the night while others slept, so that he
could better look out for their interests. And these verses from
Homer, These claim thy thoughts by day, thy watch by night, Rise, son
of Tydeus! to the brave and strong Rest seems inglorious, and the
nights too long.  (the general idea of which is that it is not
becoming for him to whom the people are entrusted and upon whom there
are so many responsibilities, to sleep the whole night through) should
be inscribed on the walls of every palace, or better, in the minds of
kings. {Henv+}

----- 1 Cicero De off. III. 1. 2 Aen. I. 305. 3 Iliad V. 490; ibid.,
X. 159. Erasmus gives the Greek, followed by a Latin verse
rendering. The translation is by Pope.

X+.  ON THE OCCUPATIONS OF THE PRINCE IN PEACE


Whenever the prince travels in public he should be doing something for
the common good; that is, he should nowhere be anything but a
prince. It is more becoming a prince to appear at public functions
than to remain secluded; but whenever he goes out, let him be careful
that his looks, his carriage, and especially his speech be such as
will better his people. He should always be mindful that whatever he
does or says is observed and known by all. Wise men have not approved
the custom of the Persian kings who spent their/4 lives buried in
their palaces. {affability+} They hoped to be acclaimed highly by
their subjects by this means alone, that they were not regularly seen
and rarely appeared before their people [for state
occasions]. Whenever they did go forth they merely displayed a
barbaric arrogance and immoderate wealth in the face of the people's
misfortunes. The rest of the time they spent in sports or in bad
expeditions, just as if there were nothing for a good prince to do in
times of peace, when there is waiting such a great harvest of
wonderful deeds if only the prince has a spirit worthy of a prince./5
There are some even today who think that the one thing which is most
honorable for kings, that is, participation in public affairs, is
unworthy of a king. There are likewise some bishops who think that
there is nothing less their function than teaching the people (which,
in fact, is the one duty for a bishop to perform), and who by some
wondrous scheme delegate to others, as if unworthy of them, their
especial functions and claim steadfastly for themselves the most
debased. But Mithridates, who was a noble king no less for his
learning than for his rule, was not ashamed to pronounce to the people
the laws with his own lips and without an interpreter. In order to do
this he is said to have thoroughly familiarized himself with
twenty-two languages./6 And Philip of Macedon did not deem it beneath
the position of a king to sit and listen to cases every day; nor did
his son, Alexander the Great, although ambitious to the point

----- 4 Xenophon Agesilaus IX. 1. 5 Cf. ibid., VIII. 8, 9. 6 Cf. Aulus
Gellius N. A. XVII. 17. 2; Valerius Maximus VIII. 7. 16; on p. 208 the
number is given as 20.

of madness in other respects. He was said to have had a habit of
covering one ear with his hand while trying a case, saying that he
kept this ear unbiased for the other party./7 The perverted praising
of princes is to blame for the turning of some so far away from these
things, for the old proverb/8 says that each one likes to employ the
art he knows and avoids those things in which he realizes he has
little ability. How, then, can you expect that anyone who has spent
his first years among flatterers+ and frothy women, corrupted first by
base opinions and then by sensual pleasures, and wasting these years
engaged in gambling, dancing, and hunting, could later on be happy in
those duties the fulfillment of which requires the most diligent
thought? Homer/9 says the prince does not have enough leisure to sleep
the whole night away, and yet such persons as I have in mind have only
one desire and that is to while away the boredom of life by finding
ever new pleasures just as if there were nothing at all which princes
could do. A good paterfamilias is never at a loss for something to do
in his own home. Is a prince without anything to do in so vast a
domain?

Evil practices are to be checkmated by good laws, distorted laws are
to be emended, evil ones are to be repealed, good magistrates are to
be sought out, and corrupt ones are to be punished or corrected. The
prince must seek out the means by which the poor common folk will be
burdened as little as possible, by which his country is freed from
robbery {Hal+} {Henv+} and criminals (and that with the least
bloodshed), [B 470] and by which he may foster and strengthen lasting
agreement among his people. There are some other things, less
important than these but not unworthy of even the greatest prince,
such as visiting his cities (civitates) with a mind to improving
them. He should strengthen the places that are unsafe; adorn the city
(civitas) with public_buildings+, bridges, colonnades, churches, river
walls, and aqueducts. He should purify places

----- 7 Cf. Plutarch Alex. XLII. 2. 8 Quoted in Cicero
Tusc. Disp. I. 18, 41, and in other places. 9 Iliad V. 490.

filled with deadly pestilence either by changing the buildings or by
draining the swamps. Streams that flow in places of no advantage he
should change to other courses; he should let in or shut out the sea
as the need of his people demands; he should see that abandoned fields
are cultivated so that the food supply is increased and that fields
which are being cultivated to little advantage are farmed in other
ways - for example, by forbidding vineyards where the wine does not
warrant the trouble of the farming but where grain could be
grown. There are literally countless activities in which it would be
honorable for a prince, and for a good prince even pleasant, to
engage. Consequently, he never will have need to seek a war because of
the tedium of idleness, or to waste the night in gambling. In those
matters which pertain to public affairs (such as his public buildings
or games) the prince should not be extravagant or lavish, but
splendid; so, too, in receiving embassies that relate to the affairs
of his people. In those matters which pertain to him as an individual,
he should be more frugal and moderate, partly that he may not seem to
be living at the public expense, and partly that he may not teach his
subjects extravagance, which is the cause of many misfortunes.

I observe that many of the ancients fell into this error (I only wish
it did not claim any [victim] today!) of turning all their efforts to
one end, namely, to leave their kingdoms not better but greater. I
have often seen it happen that while interested in extending their
boundaries they have even lost what they already had. That
much-praised statement of Theopompus/10 is not irrelevant here. He
said that he was not interested in knowing how great a kingdom he
should leave to his children but only how much better and more secure
he should leave it. And I think the Laconic proverb,/11 "Sparte t'est
ichue par le sort, orne-la," [L 608] that is, "Sparta is yours, adorn
her," is worthy of being engraved on the devices

----- 10 Plutarch Discourse to an Unlearned Prince 1. 11"Diogeniamus
8. 16; 8. 46. Erasmus's text gives as the original Greek, MXIIQTCLV
gkCCXE9, 'rQiMTIV X6(YtLEL, but Diogenianus reads xeivav for -raimnv
(as does Euripides, Frag. 723: XELV?lv).

of every prince. The good prince should be thoroughly convinced that
he can do nothing more magnificent than to hand over more prosperous
and in all ways more beautiful the kingdom - whatever it may be -
which fortune assigned to him. The character of the general
Epaminondas has been praised by the most learned men. When, because of
envy, he had been assigned a magistracy that was lowly and commonly
despised, he so conducted himself that after his term it was
considered one of the most distinguished and was sought after by the
greatest men; thus he proved that the office did not confer dignity on
the man but the man on the office. If, as we have shown in part, the
prince will see to those things especially which strengthen and
beautify the state, it follows that he will likewise shut out and ward
off those which reduce the condition of the state. It is helped by the
example of the good prince, by his wisdom and his watchfulness; by the
integrity of magistrates and officials; by the holiness of priests; by
the choice of schoolmasters; by just laws; and by interests leading to
good habits. All the attention of the good prince should be devoted to
increasing and confirming these things. Harm is done by the opposite
things, which will more easily be excluded from the state if we will
first try to tear out the very roots and sources whence these things
come. The philosophy of a good prince teaches him to be zealous and
painstaking in matters of this sort. To make beneficial arrangements
together for these things, and to compare all their plans for these
ends is the one thing really worthy of Christian princes.

If the celestial bodies are thrown out of order only slightly, or
wander from their true course, they do not do it without serious
disasters to mankind, as we clearly see manifested in eclipses of the
sun and moon. The same is true of the great princes. If they wander
from the path of honor or do any wrong through ambition, anger, or
stupidity, they cause a great deal of misfortune to the whole
world. No eclipses ever brought so much harm upon the human race as
the conflict between Pope Julius and Louis, king of France, which we
have just witnessed and wept over.

XI+. ON BEGINNING WAR


Although a prince ought nowhere to be precipitate in his plans, there
is no place for him to be more deliberate and circumspect than in the
matter of going to war. Some evils come from one source and others
from another, but from war comes the shipwreck of all that is good and
from it the sea of all calam- ities pours out. Then, too, no other
misfortune clings so steadfastly. War is sown from war; from the
smallest comes the greatest; from one comes two; from a jesting one
comes a fierce and bloody one, and the plague arising in one place,
spreads to the nearest peoples and is even carried into the most
distant places. A good prince should never go to war at all unless,
after trying every other means, he cannot possibly avoid it. If we
were of this mind, there would hardly be a war. Finally, if so ruinous
an occurrence cannot be avoided, then the prince's main care should be
to wage the war with as little calamity to his own people and as
little shedding of Christian blood as may be, and to conclude the
struggle as soon as possible. [B 471] The really Christian prince will
first weigh the great difference between man, who is an animal born
for peace and good will, and beasts and monsters, who are born to
predatory war; [he will weigh also] the difference between men and
Christian men. Then let him think over how earnestly peace is to be
sought and how honorable and wholesome it is; on the other hand [let
him consider] how disastrous and criminal an affair war is and what a
host of all evils it carries in its wake even if it is the most
justifiable war - if there really is any war which can be called
"just." Lastly, when the prince has put away all personal feelings,
let him take a rational estimate long enough to reckon what the war
will cost and whether the

final end to be gained is worth that much - even if victory is
certain, victory which does not always happen to favor the best
causes. Weigh the worries, the expenditures, the trials, the long
wearisome preparation.{war+} That barbaric flux of men in the last
stages of depravity must be got together, and while you wish to appear
more generous in favor than the other prince, in addition to paying
out money you must coax and humor the mercenary soldiers, who are
absolutely the most abject and execrable type of human being. Nothing
is dearer to a good prince than to have the best possible
subjects. But what greater or more ready ruin to moral character is
there than war? There is nothing more to the wish of the prince than
to see his people safe and prospering in every way. But while he is
learning to campaign he is compelled to expose his young men to so
many dangers, and often in a single hour to make many and many an
orphan, widow, childless old man, beggar, and unhappy wretch.

The wisdom of princes will be too costly for the world if they persist
in learning from experience how dreadful war is, so that when they are
old men, they may say: "I did not believe that war was so utterly
destructive!" But - and I call God to witness - with what countless
afflictions on the whole world have you learned that idea! The prince
will understand some day that it was useless to extend the territory
of the kingdom and that what in the beginning seemed a gain was [in
reality] tremendous loss, but in the meantime a great many thousands
of men have been killed or impoverished. These things should better be
learned from books, from the stories of old men, from the tribulations
of neighbors: "For many years this or that prince has been fighting on
for such and such a kingdom. How much more is his loss than his
gain!I" Let the good prince establish matters of the sort that will be
of lasting worth. Those things which are begun out of a fancy are to
our liking while the fancy lasts, but the things which are based on
judgment and which delight the young man, will also afford pleasure to
the old man. Nowhere is this truth more to be observed than in the
beginning of war.

Plato/1 calls it sedition, not war, when Greeks war with Greeks; and
if this should happen, he bids them fight with every restraint. What
term should we apply, then, when Christians engage in battle with
Christians, since they are united by so many bonds to each other? What
shall we say when on account of a mere title, on account of a personal
grievance, on account of a stupid and youthful ambition, a war is
waged with every cruelty and carried on during many years?

Some princes deceive themselves that any war is certainly a just one
and that they have a just cause for going to war. We will not attempt
to discuss whether war is ever just; but who does not think his own
cause just? Among such great and changing vicissitudes of human
events, among so many treaties and agreements which are now entered
into, now rescinded, who can lack a pretext - if there is any real
excuse - for going to war? But the pontifical laws do not disapprove
all war. Augustine/2 approves of it in some instances, and
St. Bernard/5 praises some soldiers. But Christ/4 himself and Peter
and Paul/5 everywhere teach the opposite. Why is their authority less
with us than that of Augustine or Bernard? Augustine in one or two
places does not disapprove of war, but the whole philosophy of Christ
teaches against it. There is no place in which the apostles do not
condemn it; and in how many places do those very holy fathers, by
whom, to the satisfaction of some, war has been approved in one or two
places, condemn and abhor it?/6 Why do we slur over all these matters
and fasten upon that which helps our sins? Finally, if any one will
investigate the matter more carefully, he will find that no one has
approved the kind of wars in which we are now commonly involved.

----- 1 Rep. V. 470; cf. also Laws I. 628. 2 Civ. Dei IV. 15; see also
XIX. 7. 3 St. Bernard (1090-1153) favored the military orders of the
church, and in 1129 wrote De laudibus novae Militia which he dedicated
to Hugh de Payns, prior of Jerusalem; in 1146 he preached the Second
Crusade. His apologia for its failure is contained in the second part
of his Book of Considerations. 4 Matt. 5:9; Luke 2:14; John 14:27;
16:33. 5 1 Pet. 3:11; 11 Pet. 3:14; Hebrews 12:I4; II Cor. 13:11. 6
Augustine Civ. Dei V. 17; see also III. 14; IV. 3 and 14; XII. 22.

 

Certain arts are not countenanced by the laws on the ground that they
are too closely allied to imposture and are too frequently practiced
by deceit; for example, astrology and the socalled "alchemy," even if
someone happens to be employing them for an honorable purpose. This
restriction will be made with far more justice in the case of wars,
for even if there are some which might be called "just," yet as human
affairs are now, I know not whether there could be found any of this
sort - that is, the motive for which was not ambition, wrath,
ferocity, lust, or greed. It too often happens that nobles, who are
more lavish than their private means allow, when the opportunity is
presented stir up war in order to replenish their resources at home
even by the plunder of their peoples. [L 610] It happens sometimes
that princes enter into mutual agreements and carry on a war on
trumped-up grounds so as to reduce still more the power of the people
and secure their own positions through disaster to their subjects. [B
472] Wherefore the good Christian prince should hold under suspicion
every war, no matter how just.

People may lay down the doctrine that your rights must not be
forsaken. In the first place those rights are connected to a large
extent with the private affairs of the prince if he has acquired them
through alliances. How unfair it would be to maintain them at the
expense of such great suffering to the people; and while you are
seeking some addition or other to your power, to plunder the whole
kingdom and to plunge it into deadliest turmoil. If one prince offends
another on some trivial matter (probably a personal one such as a
marriage alliance or other like affair) what concern is this to the
people as a whole? A good prince measures everything by the advantage
of his people, otherwise he is not even a prince. He does not have the
same right over men as over animals. A large part of the ruling
authority is in the consent of the people, which is the factor that
first created kings. If a disagreement arises between princes, why not
go to arbiters? There are plenty of bishops, abbots, and learned men,
or reliable magistrates, by whose judgment the matter could better be
settled than by such slaughter, despoliation, and calamity to the
world./7

The Christian prince should first question his own right, and then if
it is established without a doubt he should carefully consider whether
it should be maintained by means of catastrophes to the whole
world. Those who are wise sometimes prefer to lose a thing rather than
to gain it, because they realize that it will be less costly. Caesar,
I think, would prefer to give up his rights rather than seek to attain
the old monarchy and that right which the letter of the jurisconsults
conferred on him. But what will be safe, they say, if no one maintains
his rights? Let the prince insist by all means, if there is any
advantage to the state, only do not let the right of the prince bear
too hard on his subjects. But what is safe anywhere while everyone is
maintaining his rights to the last ditch? We see wars arise from wars,
wars following wars, and no end or limit to the upheaval! It is
certainly obvious that nothing is accomplished by these
means. Therefore other remedies should be given a trial. Not even
between the best of friends will relations remain permanently
harmonious unless sometimes one gives in to the other. A husband often
makes some concession to his wife so as not to break their
harmony. What does war cause but war? Courtesy, on the other hand,
calls forth courtesy, and fairness, fairness. The fact that he can
see, from the countless calamities which war always carries in its
wake, that the greatest hardship falls on those to whom the war means
nothing and who are in no way deserving of these catastrophes, will
have an effect on the devoted and merciful prince.

After the prince has reckoned and added up the total of all the
catastrophes [which would come] to the world (if that could ever be
done), then he should think over in his own mind: "Shall 1, one
person, be the cause of so many calamities? Shall I alone be charged
with such an outpouring of human blood; with causing so many widows;
with filling so many

----- 7 Cf. Deut. 17:8-10. Arbitration, especially in a small way, was
not a new idea; the authority of Erasmus must certainly have increased
its standing.

homes with lamentation and mourning; with robbing so many old men of
their sons; with impoverishing so many who do not deserve such a fate;
and with such utter destruction of morals, laws, and practical
religion? Must I account for all these things before Christ?"
{Williams+} The prince cannot punish his enemy unless he first brings
hostile activities upon his own subjects. He must fleece his people,
and he must receive [into his realm] the soldier, who has been called
ruthless (and not without justification) by Vergil./8 He must cut off
his subjects from those districts which they formerly enjoyed for
their own advantage; [or else the reverse], he must shut up his
subjects in order to hem in the enemy. And it frequently happens that
we inflict worse sufferings upon our own people than upon the
enemy. It is more difficult, as well as more desirable, to build a
fine city than to destroy it. But we see flourishing cities which are
established by inexperienced and common people, demolished by the
wrath of princes. Very often we destroy a town with greater labor and
expense than that with which we could build a new one, and we carry on
war at such great expense, such loss, such zeal, and pains, that peace
could be maintained at one-tenth of these costs.

Let the good prince always lean toward that glory which is not steeped
in blood nor linked with the misfortune of another.{Off+. I.62-78; II,
31} In war, however fortunately it turns out, the good fortune of one
is always the ruin of the other. Many a time, too, the victor weeps
over a victory bought too dearly. If you are not moved by devotion,
nor by the calamity of the world, surely you will be stirred by the
honor of the term "Christian." What do we think the Turks and Saracens
are saying about us when they see that for century after century there
has been no harmony between Christian princes; that no treaties have
secured peace; that there has been no end to bloodshed; and that there
has been less disorder among the heathen than among those who profess
the most complete accord in following the teachings of Christ?

How fleeting, short, and delicate is the life of man, and

----- 5 Eclog. I. 70; cf. Georgics I. 511. The Latin word is impius.

how exposed to calamities, with so many diseases and accidents which
are continually happening such as the falling of buildings,
shipwrecks, earthquakes, and lightning? {fortune+} There is no need,
then, of wars to stir up misfortunes; and more calamities come from
that source than from all else. It was the duty of the preachers to
have uprooted completely the ideas of discord from the hearts of the
common people. But now practically every Angle hates the Gaul, and
every Gaul the Angle, for no other reason than that he is an Angle. [B
473] The Irishman, just because he is an Irishman, hates the Briton;
the Italian hates the German; the Swabian, the Swiss; and so on
throughout the list. District hates district, and city (civitas) hates
city. Why do these stupid names do more to divide us than the common
name of Christ does to unite us? Although we may grant some war to be
just, yet, since we see that all men go mad over this scourge, it is
the part of wise priests to deflect the minds of commoners and princes
into different channels. Now we see them often as the very firebrands
of war. The bishops are not ashamed to go about in the camp, and there
is the cross, and there the body of Christ, and they mix His heavenly
sacraments with things that are more than Tartarean and in such bloody
discord produce the symbols of the greatest charity. What is more
ridiculous, Christ is in both camps, as if he were fighting against
himself. It was not enough that war+ was tolerated among Christians,
it must also be given the place of highest honor.

If the whole teachings of Christ do not everywhere inveigh against
war, if a single instance of specific commendation of war can be
brought forth in its favor, let us Christians fight. The Hebrews were
allowed to engage in war, but only by consent of God. Our oracle,
which we hear steadily in the Gospels, restrains us from war, and yet
we wage war more madly than they. David was most pleasing to God for
various good qualities, and yet He forbade His temple to be built by
him on the one ground that he was tainted with blood; that is, he was
a warrior. He chose the peaceful Solomon for this task./9 If

----- 9 1 Chron. 22:7-10.

these things were done among the Jews, what should be done among us
Christians? They had a shadow of Solomon, we have the real Solomon,
the Prince of Peace, Christ, who conciliates all things in heaven and
earth.

Not even against the Turks do I believe we should rashly go to war,
first reflecting in my own mind that the kingdom of Christ was
created, spread out, and firmly established by far different
means. Perchance then it is not right that it should be maintained by
means differing from those by which it was created and extended. We
see how many times under pretexts of wars of this kind the Christian
people have been plundered and nothing else has been
accomplished. Now, if the matter has to do with faith, that has been
increased and made famous by the suffering of martyrs and not by
forces of soldiery; but if it is for ruling power, wealth, and
possessions, we must continuously be on guard lest the cause have too
little of Christianity in it. But on the contrary, to judge from some
who are conducting wars of this kind, it may more readily happen that
we degenerate into Turks than that they become Christians through our
efforts. First let us see that we ourselves are genuine Christians,
and then, if it seems best, let us attack the Turks./10

We have written elsewhere more extensively on the evils of war and
should not repeat here. I will only urge princes of Christian faith to
put aside all feigned excuses and all false pretexts and with
wholehearted seriousness to work for the ending of that madness for
war which has persisted so long and disgracefully among Christians,
that among those whom so many ties unite there may arise a peace and
concord. Let them develop their genius to this end, and for this let
them show their strength, combine their plans, and strain every
nerve. Whoever desires to appear great, let him prove himself great in
this way. If any one accomplishes this, he will have done a deed far
more magnificent than if he had subdued the whole of Africa by
arms. It would not be so difficult to do, if everyone would cease to
favor his own cause, if we could set

----- 10 Cf. John 8:7.

aside all personal feelings and carry out the common aim, if Christ,
not the world, was in our plans. [L 612] Now, while everyone is
looking out for his own interests, while popes and bishops are deeply
concerned over power and wealth, while princes are driven headlong by
ambition or anger, while all follow after them for the sake of their
own gain, it is not surprising that we run straight into a whirlwind
of affairs under the guidance of folly. But if, after common counsel,
we should carry out our common task, even those things which are
purely personal to each one would be more prosperous. Now even that
for which alone we are fighting is lost.

I have no doubt, most illustrious of princes, but that you are of this
mind; for you were born in that atmosphere and have been trained by
the best and most honorable men along those lines. For the rest, I
pray that Christ, who is all good and supreme, may continue to bless
your worthy efforts. He gave you a kingdom untainted by blood; He
would have it always so. He rejoices to be called the Prince of Peace;
may you do the same, that by your goodness and your wisdom, at last
there may be a respite from the maddest of mad wars. The memory of the
misfortunes we have passed through will also commend peace to us, and
the calamities of earlier times will render twofold the favor of your
kindness.

