PVBLICOLAPVBLICOLAPlutarch's Lives Volume I

Amiot to the Readers+

THE reading of bookes which bring but a vaine and unprofitable
pleasure to the Reader, is justly misliked of wise and grave
men. Againe, the reading of such as doe but onely bring profit, and
make the Reader to be in love therewith, and doe not ease the payne of
the reading by some pleasauntnes in the same: doe seeme somewhat
harshe to divers delicate wits, that can not tary long upon them. But
such bookes as yeeld pleasure and profit, and doe both delight and
teache, have all that a man can desire why they should be universally
liked and allowed of all sortes of men, according to the common saying
of the Poet Horace: That he which matcheth profit with delight, Doth
winne the price in every poynt aright. Eyther of these yeeld his
effect the better, by reason the one runneth with of the other,
profiting the more bicause of the delight, and deliting the more
bicause of the profit. This commendation (in my opinion) is most
proper to the reading of stories, to have pleasure and profit matched
together which kind of delight and teaching meeting in this wise arme
in arme, hath more allowance then any other kind of waiting or
invention of man. In respect whereof it may be reasonably avowed, that
men are more beholding to such good wits, as by their, grave and wise
writing have deserved the name of Historiographers, then they are to
any other kind of writers: bicause an historie is an orderly register
of notable things said, done, or happened in time past, to mainteyne
the continual remembrance of them, and to serve for the instruction of
them to come. And like as memorie is as a storehouse of mens conceits
and devises, without the which the actions of the other two parts
should be unperfect and welneare unprofitable: So may it also be sayd,
that an historie is the very treasury of mans life, whereby the
notable doings and sayings of men, and the wonderful adventures and
straunge cases (which the long continuance of time bringeth forth) are
preserved from the death of forgetfulnes. Here-uppon it riseth, that
Plato the wise sayth, that the name of historie was given to this
recording of matters, to stay the fleting of our memorie, which
otherwise would be soone lost, and retaine litle. And we may well
perceive how greatly we be beholding unto it, if we doe no more but
consider in how horrible darkenes, and in how beastly and pestilent a
quamyre of ignorance we should be plunged: if the remembrance of all
the thinges that have beene done, and have happened before we were
borne, were utterly drowned and forgotten. Now therefore I will
overpasse the excellencie and worthines of the thing it selfe,
forasmuch as it is not onely of more antiquatie then any other kind of
writing that ever was in the worlde, but also was used among men,
before there was any use of letters at all: bicause that men in those
dayes delivered in their lifetimes the remembrance of things past to
their successors, in songes, which thy caused their children to learne
by hart, from hand to hand, as is to be seene yet in our dayes, by
thexample of the barbarous people that inhabite the newfound landes in
the West, who without any records of writings, have had the knowledge
of thinges pafst welneare eight hundred yeares afore. Likewise I leave
to discourse, that it is the surest, safest, and durablest monument
that men can leave of their doings in this world, to consecrate their
names to immortality. For there is nether picture, nor image of
marble, nor arche of triumph, nor piller, nor sumptuous sepulchre,
that can match the durablenes of an eloquent history, furnished with
the properties which it ought to have. Again, I mind not to stand much
upon this, that it hath a certaine troth in it, in that it alwayes
professeth to speake truth, and for that the proper ground therof is
to treate of the greatest and highest things that are done in the
world: insomuch that (to my seeming) the great profit thereof is as
Horace sayth, that it is commonly called the mother of trothe and
uprightness which commendeth it so greatly, as it nedeth not elswhere
to seeke any authoritie, or ornament or dignitie, but of her very
selfe. For it is a certaine rule and instruction+, which by examples
past, teacheth us to judge of things present, and to foresee things to
come: so as we may knowe what to like of, and what to follow, what to
mislike, and what to eschew. It is a picture, which (as it were in a
table) setteth before our eyes the things worthy of remembrance that
have bene done in olde time by mighty nations, noble kings and
Princes, wise governors, Valliant Capteines, and persons renowned for
some notable qualitie, representing unto us the maners of straunge
nations, the lawes and customes of old time, the particular affaires
of men, their consultations and enterprises, the meanes that they have
used to compasse them withall, and their demeaning of them selves when
they were comen to the highest, or throwen downe to the lowest degree
of state. So as it is not possible for any case to rise either in
peace or warre, in publike or private affaires, but that the person
which shall have diligently red, well conceived, and throughly
remembred histories, shall find matter in them whereat to take light
and counsell wherby to resolve himselfe to take a part, or to give
advice unto others, how to choose in doubtfull and dangerous cases
that, which may be for their most profit and in time to find out to
what poynt the matter will come if it be well handled; and how to
moderate him selfe in prosperity and how to cheer up and beare him
selfe adversities. These things it doth with much greater grace,
efficacie and speede, than the bookes of morall_Philosophie+ doe:
forasmuch as examples are of more force to move and instruct, than are
the arguments and proofs of reason, or their precise precepts, bicause
examples be the very formes of our deedes and accompanied with all
circumstances. Whereas reasons and demonstrations are generall, and
tend to the proofe of things, and to the beating of them into
understanding: and examples tende to the showing of them in practise
and execution, bicause they doe not only declare what is to be done,
but also worke a desire to do it, as well in respect of a certaine
naturall inclination which all men have to follow examples, as also
for the beawtie of vertue+, which is of such power, that wheresoever
she is seene, she maketh herselfe to be loved and liked. Againe, it
doth things with greater weight and gravitie, than the inventions and
devices of the Poets: bicause it helpeth not it selfe with any other
thing than with the plaine truth, wheras Poetry doth commonly inrich
things by commending them above the starres and their deserving,
bicause the chiefe intent thereof is to delight. Moreover, it doth
thinges with more grace and modestie than the civill lawes and
ordinances doe: bicause it is more grace for a man to teach and
instruct, than to chastise or punisb. And yet for all this, an
historie also hath his maner of punishing the wicked, by the reproch
of everlasting infamies wherewith it defaceth their remembrance, which
is a great meane to withdraw them from vice, who otherwise would be
lewd & wickedly disposed. Likewise on the contrarie parte, the
immortal praise and glorie wherewith it rewardeth welldoers, is a very
lively and sharpe spurre for men of noble corage and gentlemanlike+
nature, to cause them to adventure upon all maner of noble and great
things. For bookes are full of examples of men of high corage and
wisedom, who for desire to continue remembraunce of their name, by the
sure and certain recorde of histories, have willing yeelded their
lives to the service of the common weale, spent their goods, suffered
infinite peines both of bodie and minde in defence of the oppressed,
in making common buildings, in establishing of lawes and governments,
and in the finding out of artes and sciences necessarie for the
maintenance and ornament of mans life: for the faithfull regsitering
thereof, the thankes is due to histories. And although true vertue
seeke no reward of her commendable doings like a hireling, but
contenteth her selfe with the conscience of her well doing: yet
notwithstanding I am of opinion, that it is good and meete to draw men
by all meanes to good doing, and good men ought not to be forbidden to
hope for the honor of their vertuous deedes, seeing that honor doth
naturally accompanie vertue, as the shadow doth the bodie. For we
commonly see, not to feele the markes of desire of honor, is an
infallible signe of a base, vile and cloynish nature: and that such as
account it an unnecessarie, needelesse, or unseemely thing to be
praised, are likewise no doers of any things worthy of praise, but are
commonly men of faint corage, whose thoughtes extend no further than
to their lives, whereof also the have no further remembraunce than is
before their eyes. But if the Counsel of olde men be to be greatlie
esteemed, bicause they must needes have seene much by reason of their
long life: and if they that have travelled long in straunge countries,
and have had the managing of many affaires, and have gotten great
experience of the doings of this world, are reputed for sage, and
worthie to hbave the reynes of great governmentes put into their
handes: how greatly is the reading of histories to be esteemed, which
is able to furnishe us with mo examples in one day, than the whole
Course of the longest iife of any man is able to doe? Insomuch that
they which exercise them selves in in reading as they ought to doe,
although they be but young, become such in respect of understanding
the affaires of this world, as if they were old and grayheaded,and of
long experience. Yea though they never have removed out of their
houses, yet are they advertised, informed, and satisfied of all things
in the world, aswell as they that have shortned their lives by
innumerable travells and infinite daungers, in ronning over the whole
earth that is inhabited. Whereas on the contrary part, they that are
ignorant of the things that were done and come to passe before they
were borne, continue stil as children, though they be never so aged,
and are but as straungers in their owne native contries. To be short,
it may be truely sayd, that the reading of histories is the schole of
wisedom, to facion mens understanding, by considering advisedly the
state of the world that is past, and by marking diligently by what
lawes, maners, & discipline, Empires, kingdoms & dominions, have in
old time bene established, and afterward mainteyned & increased: or
contrariwise chaunged, diminished, & overthrowen. Also we reade, that
whensoever the right sage & vertuous Emperour of Rome, Alexander
Severus, was to consult of any matter of great importance whether it
concerned warres or government: he alwayes called such to counsell, as
were reported to be well seene in histories. Notwithstanding I know
there are that will stand against me in this poynt, and uphold that
the reading of histories can serve to small purpose, or none at all,
towards the getting of skill: bicause skill consisteth in action, and
is ingendred by the very experience and practise of things, when a man
doth wel marke and throughly beare away the things that be hath seene
with his eyes, and found true by proofe, according to the saying of
the auncient Poet Afranius. My name is skill, my Syre Experience
hyght, And memorie bred and brought me forth to lyght. Which thing was
ment likewise by the Philosopher that sayd, that the hand is the
instrument of skill. By reason whereof it comes to passe (say they)
that such as speake of matters of government and state, but specially
of matters of warre by the booke, speake but as booke knights, as the
Frenche proverbe termeth them, after the manner of Graecians, who call
him a booke Pilot, which hath not the sure and certaine knowledge of
the things that he speakes of: meaning thereby, that it is not for a
man to trust to the understanding which he hathe gotten by reading, in
things that consist in the deede doing, where the hand is to be set to
the worke: no more then the often hearing of men talke and reason of
paynting or the disputing uppon colors, without taking of the pensill
in hand, can stand a man in any stead at all to make him a good
paynter. But on the contrary part, many have proved wise men and good
Captaines, which could neither write nor reade. Besides this, they
alleage further, that in matters of warre, all things alter from yeare
to yeare: by meanes whereof the slights and policies that are to be
learned out of bookes, will serve the turne no more than mynes that
are blowen up. According whereunto Cambyses telleth his sonne Cyrus in
Xenophon, that like as in Musicke the newest songs are commonly best
liked of for once, bicause they were never heard afore: So in the
warres, those policies that never were practised afore, are those that
take best successe, and commonly have the best effect, bicause the
enemies doe least doubt of them. Neverthelesse I am not he that will
mainteyne that a wise governor of a common weale or a great Captaine
can be made of such a person, as hath never travelled out of his
study, and from his bookes: howbeit that which Cicero writeth of
Lucius Lucullus, is true, that when he departed out of Rome as
Captaine generall and Lieuetenant of the Pomanes, to make warre
against kinge Mithridates, he had no experience at all of the warres,
and yet afterward be bestowed so great diligence in the reading of
histories, and in conferring uppon every poynt with the olde Captaines
and men of long experience, whome he caried with him, that by the tyme
of his comming into Asia, where he was in deede to put his matters in
execution, he was found to he a very suffcient Captaine, as appeared
by his deedes: insomuch that by those wayes, cleane contrary to the
common order of warre, he discomfited two of the most puyssant, and
greatest Princes that were at that time in the East. For his
understanding was so quicke, his care so vigilant, and his courage so
greate, that he needed no longe tray- ning nor grosse instrucion by
experience. And although I graunt there have beene diverse Governors
and Captaynes, which by the onely force of nature (furthered by longe
continewed experience) have done goodly and greate exploytes: yet can
it not be denyed me, but that if they had matched the giftes of nature
with the knowledge of learning, and the reading of histories, they
might have done much greater thinges, and the might have becomen much
more perfect. For like as in every other cunning and skill wherein a
man intendeth to excell: so also to become a perfect and sufficient
person to governe in peace and warre, there are three thinges of
necessitie required, nameley, nature, art, and practise. Nature (in
the case that we treate of) must furnishe us with a good mother wit,
with a bodie well disposed to endure all maner of travell, and with a
good will to advaunce our selves: Art must geve us judgement and
knowledge, gotten by the examples and wise discourses that we have
read and double read in good histories: and practise will get us
readinesse, assurednesse, and the ease how to put thinges in
execucion. For though skill be the ruler of doing the deede, yet it is
a vertue of the minde which teacheth a man the meane poynt, betwene
the two faultie extremities of too much and too litle, wherein the
commendation of all doinges consisteth. And whosoever he is that goeth
about to attaine to it by the onely triall of experience, and had
lever to learne it at his owne cost, than at an other mans: he may
well be of the number of those that are touched by the auncient
proverbe, which sayth, Experience is the schoolemistresse of fooles:
because mans life is so short, and experience is hard and daungerous,
specially in matters of warre, wherein (according to the sayin of
Tamachus the Athenian Captaine) a man can not fault twice, bicause the
faultes are so great, that most commonly they bringe with them the
overthrow of the state, or the losse of the lives of those that do
them. Therefore we must not tary for this wiit that is won by
experience, which costeth so deere, and is so long a comming, that a
man is ofttimes dead in the seeking of it before he have attained it,
so as he had neede of a seconde life to imploy it in, because of the
overlate comming by it. But we must make speed by our diligent and
continual reading of histories both old and new, that we may enjoy
this happinesse which the Poet speaketh of. A happie wight is he that
by mishappes of others, doth beware of afterclappes. By the way, as
concerning those that say that paper will beare all things: if there
be any that unworthily take upon them the name of historiographers,
and deface the dignity of the story for hatred or favor, by mingling
any untrueth with it. that is not the fault of the historie, but of
the men that are partial, who abuse that name unworthily, to cover and
cloke their owne passions withall, which thing shall never come to
passe, if the writer of the storie have the properties that are
necessarily required in a storie writer, as these: That he set aside
all affection, he voyde of envy, hatred, and flattery: that he be a
man experienced in the affaires of the world, of good utterance, and
good judgement to discerne what is to he sayd, and what to he left
unsayd, and what would do more harme to have it declared, than do good
to have it reproved or condemned: forasmuch as his chiefe drift ought
to be to serve the common weale, and that he is but as a register to
set downe the judgements and definitive sentences of Gods Court,
whereof some are geven according to the ordinarie course and capacitie
of our weake naturall reason, and other some goe according to Gods
infinite power and incomprehensible wisedom, of mans understanding,
who being unable to reach the bottom of his judgements, and to finde
out the first motions and groundes thereof, do impute the cause of
them to a certaine fortune, which is nought else but a fained device
of mans wit, dazzled at the beholding of such brightnesse, and
confounded a the gaging of so bottomlesse a deepe, howbeit nothing
commeth to passe nor is done without the leave of him that is the
verie right and trueth it selfe, with whom nothing is past or to come,
and who knoweth and understandeth the very originall causes of all
necessitie. The consideration whereof teacheth men to humble them
selves under his mightie hande hy acknowledging that there is one
first cause which overruleth nature, whereof it commeth, that neither
hardinesse is alwaies happie, nor wisedom alwaies sure of good
successe. {fortune+} These so notable commodities are every where
accompanied with singular delight, which proceedeth chiefly of
diversitie and novelty wherein our nature delighteth and is greatly
desirous of: bicause we having an earnest inclination towards our
prosperity and advauncement, it goeth on still, seeking it in every
thing which it taketh to be goodly, or good in this world. But
forasmuch as it findeth not wherewith to content it selfe under the
cope of heaven, it is soone weary of the things that it had earnestly
desired affore, and so goeth on wandring in the unskiffulnes of her
likings wherof she never ceasseth to make a continue chaunging until
she have fully satisfied her desires, by attaining to the last end,
which is to be knit to her chief felicity, where is the full
perfection of goodlines and goodnes. This liking of varietie can not
be better releeved; than by that which is the finder out and the
preserver of time, the father of all novelties and messenger of
antiquitie. For if we finde a certaine singular pleasure, in
hearkening to such as he returned from some long voyage, and doe
report things which they have seene in straunge contries, as the
maners of people, the natures of places, and the fashions of lives,
differing from ours: and if we be sometime so ravished with delight
and pleasure at the hearing of the talke of some wise, discreete, and
well spoken old man, from whose mouth there floweth a streame of
speech sweeter than honnie, in rehearsing the adventures which he hath
had in his greene an youthful yeares, the paines that he hath endured,
and the perils he hath overpassed, so as we perceive not how the time
goeth away: how much more ought we be ravished with delight and
wondring, to behold the state of mankind, and the true successe of
things, which antiquitie hath and doth bring forth from the beginning
of the world, as the setting up of Empires, the oerthrow of
Monarchies, the rising and falling of Kingdoms, and all things else
worthie admiration, and the same lively, set forth in the faire, rich,
and true table of eloquence? And that so lively, as in the very
reading of them we feele our mindes to be so touched by them, not as
though the thinges were alreadie done and past, but as though they
were even then presently in doing, and we finde our selves caried away
with gladnesse and griefe through feare or hope, well neere as though
we were then at the doing of them: whereas notwithstanding we be not
in any paine or daunger, but only conceive in our mindes the
adversities that other folkes have endured, our selves sitting safe
with our contentation & ease, according to these verses of the Poet
Lucretius: It is a pleasure for to sit at ease Upon the land, and
safely thence to see How other folkes are tossed on the seaes, That
with the blustring windes turmoyled be. Not that the sight of others
miseries Doth any way the honest hart delight, But for bicause it
liketh well our eyes, To see harmes free that on our selves might
light. Also it is seene that the reading of histories doth so holde
and allure good wits, that divers times it not only maketh them to
forget all other pleasures, but also serveth very fittely to turne
away their griefes, and somtimes also to remedie their diseases. As
for example, we find it written of Alphonsus King of Naples, that
Prince so greatly renowmed in Chronicles for his wisedom and
goodnesse, that being sore sicke in the citie of Capua when his
Phisitions had spent all the cunning that they had to recover him his
health, and he saw that nothing prevailed: he determined with him
selfe to take no mo medicines, hbt for his recreacion caused the
storie of Quintus Curtius, concerning the deedes of Alexander the
great, to be red before bim: at the hearing whereof he tooke so
wonderfull pleasure, that nature gathered strongth by it, and overcame
the waywardnes of his disease. Whereupon having soone recovered his
helth, he discharged his Phisitions with such word as these: Feast me
no more with your Hippocrates and Galene, sith they can no skill to
helpe me to recover my helth: but well fare Quintus Curtius that could
so good skill to helpe me to recover my helth. Now if the reading and
knowledge of histories be delightfull and profitible to all other kind
of folke: I say it is much more for great Princes and Kings, bicause
they have to do with charges, of greatest weight and difficultie, to
best stored with giftes and knowledge for the discharge of their
dueties: seeing the ground of stories is, to treate of all maner of
high matters of state, as warres, battells, cities, contries, treaties
of peace and alliances, and therefore it seemeth more fit for them,
than for any other kinde of degrees of men: bicause they being bred
and brought up tenderly, and at their ease, by reason of the great
regard and care that is had of their persons, (as is meete for so
great states to have) they take not so great paines in their youth for
the learning of things as behoveth those to take which will learne the
noble auncient languages, and the painfull doctrine comprehended in
Philosophie. Againe, when thy come to mans state, their charge calleth
them to deale in great affaires, so as there remaineth no exercise of
wit more convenient for them, than the reading of histories in their
owne tunge, which without paine is able to teache them even with great
pleasure and ease, whatsoever the painfull workes of the Philosophers
concerning the government of common weales can shewe them, to make
them skilful in the well ruling and governing of the people and
contries that God hath put under their subjection. But the worst is,
that they ever (or for the most part) have such maner of persons about
them as seeke nothing els but to please them by all the wayes they
can, and there are very few that dare tell them the truth freely in
all things: whereas on the contrary part, an history flattereth+ them
not, but layeth open before their eyes the faults and vices of such as
were like them in greatnesse of degree. and therefore Demetrius
Phalereus (a man renowned aswell for his skill in good government of a
common weale as for his excellent knowledge otherwise) counselled
Ptolomy after the death of Alexander the great that he should often
and diligently reade the bookes that treated of the government of
kingdomes, bicause (sayd he) thou shalt find many things there which
thy servaunts and familiar friendes dare not tell thee. Moreover, this
is another thinge, that suche great personages can not easily travell
out of the bounds of their dominions, to goe view straunge contries as
private persons doe: bicause the jelousie of their state, and the
regarde of their dignitie, requires that they should never he in place
where another man might commaund them. And often times for want of
having seene the contries, and knowen the people and Princes that are
their neighhours, they have adventured uppon attempts without good
ground. to avoyde the which, the instruction they may have by the
reading of histories, is one of the easiest and fittest remedies that
can be found. And though there were none other cause then onely this
last, surely it ought to induce Princes to the reading of histories,
wherein are written the heroical deeds of wise and valiant men,
specially of kings that have bene before them, the considering whereof
may cause them to be desirous to become like them, specially which
were of stately & noble courage: because the seedes of Princely
vertues that are bred with them selves, doe then quicken them up with
an emulacion towards those that have bene or are equall in degree with
them, aswell in respect of noblenes of bloud, as of greatnes of state,
so as they be loth to give place to any person, and much lesse can
find in their in their harts to be outgone in glory of vertuous
doings. Whereof innumerable examples might be alleaged if the thing
were not so well knowen of it self, that it were much more against
reason to doubt of it, than needefull to prove it. Therefor a man may
truely conclude, that an historie is the scholemistresse to Princes,
at whose hand they may without payne, and with singular pleasure,
learn the most part of the things that belonge to their office. Now,
according to the diversitie of the matter that it treateth of, or the
order and manner of writing that it useth, it hath sondry names given
unto it: But yet among the rest there are two chiefe kinds. The one
which setteth downe mens doings and adventures at length, is called by
the common name of an historie: the other which declareth their
natures, sayings, and maners, a properly named their lives. And
although the ground of them both doe cloze very neare in one, yet doth
the one respect more the things, and the other the Persons: the one
more common, and the other more private: the one concerneth more the
things that are without the man, and the other the things that
proceede from within: the one the events, the other the consultacions:
betwene the which there is oftentymes great oddes, according to this
aunswer to the Persian Siramnes, to such as marvelled how it came to
passe, that his devices being so politike had so unhappy successe: It
is (quod he) bicause my devices are wholly from my own invention, but
the effects of them are in the disposition of fortune+ and the
king. And surely among all those that ever have taken uppon them to
write the lives of famous men, the chiefe prerogative, by the
judgement of such as are clearest sighted is justly given to the
Greeke Philosopher Plutarke, borne in the city of Chaeronea in the
contry of Boetia, a noble man, perfect in all rare knowledge, as his
workes may well put men out of doubt, if they lyst to read them
through, who all his life long even to his old age, had to deale in
affayres of the common weale, as he him selfe witnesseth in divers
places, specially in the treatise which he intitled, Whether an olde
man ought to meddle with the government of a common weale or not: and
who had the hap & honor to be schoolemaster to the Emperour Trajan, as
is commonly beleeved, and as it expressely pretended by a certaine
Epistle set before the Latin translation of his matters of state,
which (to say the truth) seemeth in my judgement to be somewhat
suspicious, bicause I find it not among his workes in Greeke, besides
that it speaketh as though the booke were dedicated to Trajan, which
thinge is manifestly disporved by the beginning of the booke, and by
divers other reasons. Yet notwithstanding, bicause me thinkes it is
sagely and gravely written, and well beseeming him: I have set it
downe here in this place. "Plutarke unto Trajan sendeth greeting. I
know well that the modestie of your nature was not desirous of
Sovereintie, though you have always indevored to deserve it by your
honorable conversation: by reason whereof you have bene thought so
much the worthier of it, as you have bene founde the further of from
all ambition. And therefore do I now rejoice in your vertue & my
fortune, if it be so great as to cause you to administer that thing
with justice, which you have obtained by desert. For otherwise I am
sure you put your selfe in hazard of great daungers, and me in perill
of slaunderous tongues, bicause Rome can not away with a wicked
Emperour, and the common voyce of the people is alwaies wont to cast
the faultes of the faultes of the schollers in the teeth of their
schoolemaisters: as for example: Seneca is railed upon by slaunderous
tonges, for the faultes of his scholler Nero: the scapes of
Quintillians young schollers are imputed to Ouintilian him selfe: and
Socrates is blamed for being too myld to his hearers. But as for you,
there is hope you shall doe all things well enough, so you keepe you
as you are. If you first set your selfe in order, and then dispose all
other things according to vertue, all things shall fall out according
to your desire. I have set you downe the meanes in writing, which you
must observe for the well governing of your common weale, and have
shewed you of how great force your behaviour may be in that
behalfe. If you thinke good to follow those thinges, you have Plutarke
for the directer and guider of your life: If not, I protest unto you
by this Epistle, that your falling into daunger to the overthrow of
the Empire, is not by the doctrine of Plutarke" This Epistle
witnesseth plainly that be was the schoolemaister of Trajan, which
thing seemeth to be avowed by this writing of Suidas: Plutarke being
borne in the citie of Charonea in Boeotia, was in the time of the
Emperour Trajan, and somehwat affore. But Trajan honored him with the
dignitie of Coonsulship, and commanded the officers & Magistrates that
were throughout the contrie of Illyria, that they should not do any
thing without his counsell and authoritie. So doth Suidas write of
him. And I am of opinion, that Trajan being so wise an Emperour, would
never have done him so great honor, if he had not thought him selfe
greatly beholding to him for some speciall cause. But the thing that
maketh me most to beleve it true, is, that the same goodnesse and
justice appeared to be naturally imprinted in most of Trajans sayings
and doings, whereof the pattern and mowld (as a man might terme it) is
cast and set down in Plutarkes Moralls, so as men may perceive
expressely, that the one could well skill to performer rightly, that
which the other had taught wisely. For Dion mriteth, that among other
honors which the Senate of Rome gave by decree unto Trajan, they gave
him the title of the Good Emperour. And Eutropius reporteth that even
unto his time, when a new Emperour came to he received of the Senate,
among the cries of good hansell, and the wishes of good lucke that
were made unto him, one was: happier be thou than Augustus and better
than Trajan. Howsoever the case stoode, it is very certaine that
Plutarke dedicated the collection of his Apothegmes unto him. But when
he had lived a long time at Rome, and was come home agaiane to his
owne house, he fell to writing this excellent worke of Lives, which he
calleth the Parallelon, as much as to say, as a cupling or matching,
bicause he matcheth a Grecian with a Romane, setting down their lives
ech after other, and comparing them together, as he found likeness of
nature, conditions, or adventures betwext them, and examining what the
one of them had better or worser, greater of lesser than the other:
which things he doth with so goodly and grave discourse every where,
taken out of the hidden secrets of morall and naturall Philosophie,
with so sage precepts and frutefull instructions, with so effectuall
commendation of vertue, and detestation of vice, with so many goodly
allegacions of other authors, with so many fit comparisons, and with
so many high inventions: that the booke may better be called by the
name of the Treasorie+ of all rare and Perfect learning, than by any
other name. Also it is sayd, that Theodorus Gaza, a Grecian of
singular learning, and a worthie of the auncient Greece, being asked
on a time by his familiar frendes (which saw him so earnestly given to
his studie, that he forgate all other things) what author he bad
leverest to choose, if he were at that poynt that he must needes
choose some one to holde him to alone, did aunswere that be would
choose Plutarke: bicause that if they were all put together, there was
no one both so profitable, and so pleasaunt to read, as he. Sosius
Senecio to whom he dedicateth his worke, was a Senator of Rome, as
witnesseth Dion, who writeth that the three persons whom Trajan most
loved and honored, were Sosius, Parma, and Celsus, insomuch that he
caused images of them to be set up. True it is that he wrote the lives
of many other men, which the spitefulnes of time hath bereft us of,
among which he himselfe maketh mention of the lives of Scipio
Africanuss, and Metellus Numidicus. And I have red a litle Epistle of
a sonne of his, whose name is not expressed, copied out of an olde
copie in the Librarie of S. Marke in Venice, wherein he writeth to a
frende of his, a register of all the bookes that his father made: and
there among the cupples of lives, he setteth downe the lives of Scipio
and Epaminondas, and lastly the lives of Augustus Caesar, of Tiberius,
of Caligula, ,, of Claudieus, of Nero, of Galba, of Vitellius, and of
Otho. .ut having used all the diligence that I could in serching the
chiefe Libraries of Venice and Rome, I could never find them
out. Onely I drew out certain diversities of readinges, and many
corrections by conferring the old written copies with the Printed
bookes: which have stoode me in great stead to the under- standing of
many hard places: and there are a great number of them which I have
restored by conjecture by the judgement and helpe of such men of this
age, as are of greatest knowledge in humane learning. Yet for all
this, there remaine some places unamended, howbeit very fewe, bicause
some lines were wanting in the originall copies, whereof (to my
seeming) it was better for me to witnesse the want by marking it with
some starre: than to gesse at it with all adventure, or to adde any
thing to it. Now finally, if I have overshot my selfe in any thing, as
it is verie easie to do in such a hard and long work, specially to a
man of so small abilitie as I am: I beseeche the Readers to vouchsafe
for my discharge, to admit the excuse which the Poet Horace giveth me,
where he sayth: A man may well be overseene In workes that long and
tedious bene. Specially sith that of so many good men, and men of
skill as have heretofore set hand to the translating of it, there was
never yet any one found that went through with it in any Ianguage, at
leastwise that I have seene or heard of: and that such as have
enterprised to translate it, specially into Latin, have evidently
witnessed the hardnesse thereof, as they may easely perceive which
list to conferre their translations with mine. Neverthelesse if it so
fortune that men find not the speech of this translation so flowing,
as they have found some other of mine, that are abroad in mens hands:
I beseech the readers to consider, that the offlce of a fit transfer,
consisteth not onely in the faitffull expressing of his authors
meaning but also in a certaine resembling and shadowing out of the
forme of his style and the maner of his speaking: unlesse he will
commit the errour of some painters, who having taken upon them to draw
a man lively, do paint him long where he should be short, and grosse
where he should be slender, and yet set out the resemblance of his
countenance naturally. For @ow harsh or rude soever my speech be, yet
am I sure that my translation will he much easier to my contriemen,
than the Greeke copie is, even to such as are best practised in the
Greeke tonge, by reason of Plutarkes peculiar maner of inditing which
is rather shpe, learned, and short, than plaine, polished, and
easie. At the hardest, although I have not compassed my matters so
happily as ye coulde have wished and desired: yet do I hope that your
Lordships in reading it will hold the parties good will excused, which
hath taken such paines in doing of it to profit you. And if my labor
be so happie, as to content you: God be praised for it, which hath
given me the grace to finish it.

The Life of Theseus+

LIKE AS historiographers describing the world (frende Sossius Senecio)
doe of purpose referre to the uttermost partes of their mappes the
farre distant regions whereof they be ignoraunt, with this note: these
contries are by meanes of sandes and drowthes unnavigable, rude, full
of venimous beastes, SCYTHIAN ise, and frosen seas. Even so may I
(which in comparinge noble mens lives have already gone so farre into
antiquities as the true and certaine historie could lead me) of the
rest, being thinges past all proofe or chalenge, Very well say: that
beyonde this time all is full of suspicion and dout, being delivered
us by Poets and Tragedy makers, sometimes without trueth and
likelihoode, and alwayes without certainty. Howbeit, having heretofore
set foorth the lives of Lycurgus (which established the lawes of the
LACEDAEMONIANS) and of king Numa Pompilius: me thought I might go a
litle further to the life of Romulus, sence I was come so nere
him. But considering my selfe as the Poet Eschilus did: What champion
may with such a man compare? or who (thinke I) shalbe against him set?
Who is so bold? or who is be that dare defend his force, in such
encounter met? In the end I resolved to match him which did set up the
noble and famous city of ATHENS, with him which founded the glorious &
invincible city of ROME. Wherein I would wishe that the inventions of
Poets, and the traditions of fabulous antiquitie, would suffer them
selves to be purged and reduced to the forme of a true and historicall
reporte: but when they square too much from likelyhode, and can not be
made credible, the readers will of curtesie take in good parte that,
which I could with most probability wryte of such antiquities. Now
surely me thinkes, that Theseus in many thinges was much like unto
Romulus. For being both begotten by stealth, and out of lawful
matrimony: both were reputed to be borne of the seede of the
goddes. {Edmund+} Both valiant were, as all the world doth know. Both
joyned valiancy with government. The one of them built ROME, and the
other, by gathering into one dispersed people, erected the citie of
ATHENS: two of the most noble cities of the worlde. The one and the
other were ravishers of women: and neither thone nor thother coulde
avoyde the mischiefe of quarrell and contention with their frendes,
nor the reproch of staining them selves with the blood of their
nearest kinsemen. Moreover, they say that both the one and the other
in the end did get the hate and ill will of their citizens: at the
least if we will beleve that reporte of Theseus, which carieth
greatest show of trueth. Theseus of his fathers side, was descended of
the right linage of Erictheus the great, and of the first inhabitants
which occupied the contrie of ATTICA, the which since were called
Autocthones, as much to say, as borne of them selves. For there is no
memories or other mention made, that they came out of any other contry
then that. And of his mothers side he came of Pelops, who was in his
time the mightiest king of all the contrie of PELOPONNESVS, not so
much for his goodes and richesse, as for the number of children which
he had. For his daughters which were many in number, he bestowed on
the greatest Lordes of all the contrie: his sonnes also, which
likewise were many, he dispersed into diverse cities and free townes,
findinge meanes to make them governors and heades of the
same. Pitheus, grandfather to Theseus on the mothers side, was one of
his sonnes, and founded the litle city of TROEZEN, and was reputed to
be one of the wisest men of his time. But the knowledge and wisedom,
which onely caried estimacion at that time, consisted altogether in
grave sentences, and moral sayinges. As those are which wanne the Poet
Hesiodus such fame for his booke intituled, The workes and dayes: in
the which is read even at this present, this goodly sentence, which
they father upon Pitheus. Thou shalt performe, thy promise+ and thy
pay: to hyred men, and that without delay. And this doth Arislotle the
Philosopher himselfe testifie: and the Poet Euripides also, calling
Hippolytus the scholler of the holy Pitheus, doth sufficiently declare
of what estimacion he was. But Aegeus desiring (as they say) to know
how he might have children, went unto the city of DELPHES to the
oracle of Apollo: where by Apolloes Nunne that notable prophecy was
geven him for an aunswer. The which did forbid him to touch or know
any woman, untill he was returned againe to ATHENS. And bicause the
words of this prophecy were somewhat darke, & hard: he tooke his way
by the city of TROFZEN, to tell it unto Pitheus. The wordes of the
prophecy were these. O thou which art agemme of perfect grace, plucke
not the tappe, out of thy trusty toonne: Before thou do, return unto
thy place, in Athens towne, from whence thy race doth roonne. Pitheus
understanding the meaning, perswaded him, or rather cunningly by some
devise deceived him in such sorte, that he made him to lye with his
daughter called AEthra. AEgeus after he had accompanied with her,
knowing that she was Pitheus daughter with whom he had lyen, and
douting that he had gotten her with child: left her a sword and a
payer of shoes, the which he hidde under a great hollow stone, the
hollownes whereof served just to receive those things which he layed
under it, and made no living creature privy to it but her alone,
straightly charging her, that if she happened to have a sonne, when he
were come to mans state, and of strength to remove the stone, and to
take those things from under it which he left there: {Excalibur+} that
she should then sende him unto him by those tokens, as secretly as she
could, that no body els might knowe of it. For he did greatly feare
the children of one called Pallas, the which laye in wayte and spyast
by all the meanes they could to kill him, only of despight bicause he
had no children, they being fiftie brethren, and all begotten of one
father. This done, he departed from her. And AEthra within fewe
moneths after was delivered of a goodly sonne, the which from that
time was called Theseus: and as some say, so called, bicause of the
tokens of knowledge his father had layed under the stone. Yet some
others write, that it was afterwardes at ATHENS when his father knewe
him, and avowed him for his sonne. But in the meane time, during his
infancie and childehood, he was brought up in the house of his
grandfather Pitheus, under the government and teaching of one called
Connidas, his schoolemaster: in honour of whom the ATHENIANS to this
daye doe sacrifice a weather, the daye before the great feaste of
Theseus having more reason to honour the memorye of this governour,
then of a Silanion and of a Parrbasius, to whom they doe honour also,
bicause they paynted and caste mowldes of the images of Theseus. Now
there was a custome at that time in GRECE, that the yong men after
their infancie and growth to mans state, went unto the cittie of
DELPHES, to offer parte of their heares in the temple of
Apollo. Theseus also went thither as other did: and some saye that the
place where the ceremonie of this offering was made, hath ever sence
kept the olde name, (and yet continueth) Theseia. Howbeit he dyd not
shave his head but before only, as Homer sayeth, like he facion of the
ABANTES in olde time: and this manner of shaving of heares, was called
for his sake, Theseida. And as concerning the ABANTES, in trothe they
were the very first that shaved them selves after this facion:
nevertheles they learned it not of the ARABIANS as it was thought of
some, neither dyd they it after the imitation of the MISSIANS. But
bicause they were warlike and valliant men, which did joyne neere unto
their enemie in battell, and above all men of the worlde were
skilfullest in fight hande to hande, and woulde keepe their grounde:
as the Poet Archilochus witnesseth in these verses. They use no
slynges in foughten fields to have, nor bended bowes: but swords and
trenchant blades. For when fierce Mars beginneth for to rave, in
bloody field: then every man invades His fiercest foe, and fighteth
hand to hand. then doe they deeds, right cruell to recompt. For in
this wise, the brave and warlike bande Doe shew their force which come
from Negrepont.  The cause why they were thus shaven before was, for
that their enemies should not have the vauntage to take them by the
heares of the head while they were fighting. And for this selfe same
consideration, Alexander the great commaunded his captaines to cause
all the MACEDONIANS to shave their beards: bicause it is the easiest
holde (and readiest for the hande) a man can have of his enemie in
fighting, to holde him fast by the same. But to returne to
Theseus. AEthra his mother had ever unto that time kept it secret from
him, who was his true father. And Pitheus also had geven it out
abroade, that he was begotten of Neptune, bicause the TROEZENIANS have
this god in great veneration, and doe worshippe him as patron and
protector of their cittie, making offerings to him of their first
fruites: and they have for the marke and stampe of their money, the
three picked mace, which is the signe of Neptune, called his
Trident. But after he was comen to the prime and lustines of his
youth, and that with the strength of his bodie be shewed a great
courage, joyned with a naturall wisedome, and stayednes of wit: then
his mother brought him to the place where this great hollowe stone
laye, and telling him truely the order of his birth, and by whom he
was begotten, made him to take his fathers tokens of knowledge, which
he had hidden there, and gave him counsell to goe by sea to ATHENS
unto him. Theseus easilye lyft up the stone, and tooke his fathers
tokens from under it: Howbeit he answered playnely, that he would not
goe by sea, notwithstanding that it was a great deale the safer waye,
and that his mother and grandfather both had instantly entreated him,
bicause the waye by lande from TROEZEN to ATHENS was very daungerous,
all the wayes being besett by robbers & murderers. For the worlde at
that time brought forth men, which for strongnesse in their armes, for
swyftnes of feete, and for a generall strength of the whole bodye, dyd
farre passe the common force of others, and were never wearie for any
labour or travell they tooke in hande. But for all this, they never
employed these giftes of nature to any honest or profitable thing, but
rather delighted villanously to hurte and wronge others: as if all the
fruite and profit of their extraordinary strength had consisted in
crueltye, and violence only, and to be able to keepe others under & in
subjection, and to force, destroye, & spoyle all that came to their
handes. Thincking that the more parte of those which thincke it a
shame to doe ill, and commend justice+, equitie, and humanitie, doe it
of fainte cowardly heartes, bicause they dare not wronge others, for
feare they should receyve wronge them selves: and therefore, that they
which by might+ could have vauntage over others, had nothing to doe
with suche quiet qualities. Nowe Hercules, travailling abroade in the
worlde, drave awaye many of those wicked thevishe murderers, and some
of them he slewe and put to death, other as he passed through those
places where they kept, dyd bide them selves for feare of him, and
gave place: in so much as Hercules, perceyving they were well tamed
and brought lowe, made no further reckoning to pursue them any
more. But after that by fortune he had slayne Iphitus with his owne
handes, and that he was passed over the seas into the countrye of
LYDIA, 'where he served Queene Omphale a long time, condemning him
selfe unto that voluntarie payne for the murder he had committed. All
the Realme of LYDIA during his abode there, remained in great peace
and securitie from such kynde of people. Howbeit in GRECE, and all
thereabouts, these olde mischiefes beganne againe to renue, growing
hotter and violenter then before: bicause there was no man that
punished them, nor that durst take upon him to destroye them. By which
occasion, the waye to goe from PELOPONNESVS to ATHENS by lande was
very perillous. And therefore Pitheus declaring unto Theseus, what
manner of theeves there were that laye in the waye, and the outrages
and villanies they dyd to all travellers and wayefaring men, sought
the rather to perswade him thereby to take his voyage alonge the
seas. Howbeit in mine opinion, the fame and glorie+ of Hercules noble
dedes, had long before secretly sett his hearte on fire, so that he
made reckoning of none other but of him, and lovingly hearkened unto
those which woulde seeme to describe him what manner of man he was,
but chiefly unto those which had seene him, and bene in his companye,
when he had sayed or done any thing worthy of memorye. For then he dyd
manifestly open him selfe, that he felt the like passion in his
hearte, which Themistocles long time afterwardes endured, when he
sayed: that the victorie and triumphe of Miltiades would not lett him
sleepe. For even so, the wonderful admiration which Theseus had of
Hercules corage, made him in the night that he never dreamed but of
his noble actes & doings, and in the daye time, pricked forwardes with
emulation & envie of his glorie, he determined with him selfe one daye
to doe the like, and the rather, bicause they were neere kynsemen,
being cosins removed by the mothers side. For AEthra was the daughter
of Pitheus, and Alcmena (the mother of Hercules) was the daughter of
Lysidices, the which was halfe sister to Pitheus, bothe children of
Pelops and of his wife Hippodamia. So he thought he should be utterly
shamed and disgraced, that Hercules travelling through the worlde in
that sorte, dyd seeke out those wicked theeves to rydde both sea &
lande of them: & that he, farre otherwise, should flye occasion that
might be offered him, to fight with them that he should meete on his
waye. Moreover, he was of opinion he should greately shame & dishonour
him, whom fame and common bruite of people reported to be his father:
if in shonning occasion to fight, he should convey him selfe by sea,
and should carie to his true father also a paire of shooes, (to make
him knowen of him) and a sworde not yet bathed in bloude. Where he
should rather seeke cause, by manifest token of his worthie deedes, to
make knowen to the worlde, of what noble bloude he came, and from
whence he was descended. With this determination, {Hal+} Theseus
holdeth on his purposed jorney, with intent to hurte no man, yet to
defende him selfe, and to be revenged of those which woulde take upon
them to assault him. The first therefore whom he slewe within the
territories of the cittie of EPIDAVRVM, was a robber called
Periphetes. This robber used for his ordinarie weapon to carie a
clubbe, and for that cause he was commonly surnamed Cognetes, that is
to saye, a clubbe caryer. So he first strake at Theseus to make him
stande: but Theseus fought so lustely with him, that he killed
him. Whereof he was so glad, and chiefly for that he had wonne his
clubbe, that ever after he caryed it him selfe about with him, as
Hercules dyd the lyons skynne. And like as this spoyle of the lyon dyd
witnesse the greatnes of the beast which Hercules had slayne: even so
Theseus went all about, shewing that this clubbe which he had gotten
out of anothers hands, was in his owne handes invincible. And so going
on further, in the streightes of PELOPONNESVS he killed another,
called Sinnis surnamed Pityocamtes, that is to saye, a wreather, or
bower of pyne apple trees: whom he put to death in that selfe cruell
manner that Sinnis had slayne many other travellers before. Not that
he had experience thereof, by any former practise or exercise: but
only to shewe, that cleane strength coulde doe more, then either arte
or exercise. This Sinnis had a goodly fayer daughter called Perigouna,
which fled awaye, when she sawe her father slayne: whom he followed
and sought all about. But she had hydden her selfe in a grove full of
certen kyndes of wilde pricking rushes called Stabe, and wilde
sparage, which she simplye like a childe intreated to hyde her, as if
they bad heard and had sense to understand her: promising them with an
othe, that if they saved her from being founde, she would never cutt
them downe, nor burne them. But Theseus fynding her, called her, and
sware by his faith he would use her gently, and doe her no hurte, nor
displeasure at all. {grace+} Upon which promise she came out of the
bushe, and laye with him, by whom she was conceyved of a goodly boye,
which was called Menalippus. Aftetwardes Theseus maried her unto one
Deioneus, the sonne of Euritus the Oechalian. of this Menalippus, the
sonne of Theseus, came Ioxus: the which with Ornytus brought men into
the countrye of CARIA, where he buylt the cittie of IOXIDES. And
hereof cometh that olde auncient ceremonie, observed yet unto this
daye by those of IOXIDES, never to burne the bryars of wilde sparage,
nor the stabe, but they have them in some honour & reverence. Touching
the wilde savage sowe of Crommyon, otherwise surnamed Phaa, that is to
saye, overgrowen with age: she was not a beast to be made light
account of, but was very fierce, and terrible to kyll. Theseus
notwithstanding taryed for her, and kylled her in his jorney, to the
ende it shoulde not appeare to the worlde, that all the valliant
deedes he dyd, were done by compulsion, & of necessitie: adding
thereto his opinion also, that a valliant man should not onely fight
with men, to defend him selfe from the wicked: but that he should be
the first, to assaulte and slaye wilde hurtefull beastes. Nevertheles
others have written, that this Phaa was a woman robber, a murderer,
and naught of her bodye, which spoyled those that passed by the place
called CROMMYONIA, where she dwelt: and that she was surnamed a sowe,
for her beastly brutishe behaviour, and wicked life, for the which in
the ende she was also slayne by Theseus. After her he kylled Sciron,
into the territories of MEGARA, bicause he robbed all travelers by the
waye, as the common reporte goeth: or as others saye, for that of a
cruell, wicked, and savage pleasure, he put forth his feete to those
that passed by the sea side, and compelled them to washe them. And
thenwhen they thought to stowpe to doe it, he still spurned them with
his feete, till he thrust them hedlong into the sea: so Theseus threw
him hedlong downe the rockes. Howbeit the writers of MEGARA impugning
this common reporte, and desirous (as Simonides sayeth) to overthrowe
it that had continued by prescription of time: dyd mainteine that this
Sciron was never any robber, nor wicked persone, but rather a pursuer
and punisher of the wicked, and a friend and a kynseman of the most
honest, and justest men of GRECE. For there is no man but will
confesses that AEacus was the most vertuous man among the GRECIANS in
his time, and that Cychreus the SALAMINIAN is honoured and reverenced
as a god at ATHENS: and there is no man also but knoweth, that Peleus
and Telamon were men of singular vertue. Nowe it is cetteine, that
this Sciron was the sonne in lawe of Cychreus, father in lawe of
AEacus, & grandfather of Peleus and of Telamon, the which two were the
children of Endeida, the daughter of the sayed Sciron, and of his wife
Chariclo. Also it is not very likely, that so many good men would have
had affinitie with so naughty and wicked a man: in taking of him, and
geving him that, which men love best of all things in the worlde. And
therefore the Historiographers saye, that it was not the first time,
when Theseus went unto ATHENS, that he killed Sciron: but that it was
many dayes after, when he tooke the cittie of ELEVSIN, which the
MEGARIANS helde at that time, where he deceyved the governour of the
cittie called Diocles, and there he slewe Sciron. And these be the
objections the MEGARIANS alledged touching this matter. He slewe also
Cercyon the ARCADIAN, in the cittie of ELEVSIN, wrestling with
him. And going a litle further, he slewe Damastes, otherwise surnamed
Procrustes, in the cittie of HERMIONIA: and that by Stretching on him
out, to make him even with the length and measure of his beddes, as he
was wont to doe unto straungers that passed by. Theseus dyd that after
the imitation of Hercules, who punished tyrannes with the selfe same
payne and torment, which they had made others suffer. For even so dyd
Hercules sacrifice Busiris. So he stifled Antheus in wrestling. So he
put Cycnus to death, fighting with him man to man. So he brake
Termerus heade, from whom this proverbe of Termerus evill came, which
continueth yet unto this daye: for this Termerus dyd use to put them
to death in this sorte whom he met: to jo jolle his head against
theirs. Thus proceeded Theseus after this selfe manner, punishing the
wicked in like sorte, justly compelling them tabyde the same payne and
torments, which they before had unjustly made others abyde. And so he
helde on his jorney untill he came to the river of CEPHISVS, where
certaine persones of the house of the Phytalides were the first which
went to meete him, to honour him, and at his request they purified him
according to the ceremonies used at that time: and afterwardes having
made a sacrifice of propitiation unto their goddes, they made him
great chere in their houses: and this was the first notable
entertainment he founde in all his jorney. It is supposed he arrived
in the cittie of ATHENS, eight daye of the moneth of June, which then
they called Cronius. He founde the comon wealth turmoyled with
seditions, factions, and divisions, and perticularly the house of
AEgeus, in very ill termes also, bicause that Medea (being banished
out of the cittie of CORINTHE) was come to dwell in ATHENS, and
remained with AEge- ius, whom she had promised by vertue of certaine
medicines to make him to get children. But when she heard tell that
Theseus was comen, before that the good king AEgeus (who was nowe
becomen olde, suspitious, and affrayed of sedition, by reason of the
great factions with in the cittie at that time) knewe what he was, she
perswaded him to poyson him at a feaste which they woulde make him as
a straunger that passed by. Theseus failed not to goe to this prepared
feaste whereunto he was bydden, but yet thought it not good to
disclose him selfe. And the rather to give AEgeus occasion and meane
to knowe him: when they brought the meate to the borde, he drewe out
his sworde, as though he woulde have cut with all, and shewed it unto
him. AEgeus seeing it, knewe it straight, & forthwith overthrewe the
cuppe with poyson which was prepared for him: and after he had
inquired of him, and asked thinges, he embraced him as his
sonne. Afterwardes in the common assembly of the inhabitants of the
cittie, he declared, howe he avowed him for his sonne. Then all the
people receyved him with exceeding joye, for the renowne of his
valiantnes and manhoode. And some saye, that when AEgeus overthrewe
the cuppe, the poyson which was in it, fell in that place, where there
is at this present a certen compasse inclosed all about within the
temple, which is called Delphinium. For even there in that place, in
the olde time, stoode the house of AEgeus: in witnes whereof, they
call yet at this present time the image of Mercurye (which is on the
side of the temple looking towardes the rising of the sunne) the
Mercurye gate of AEgeus. But the PALLANTIDES, which before stoode
allwayes in hope to recover the realme of ATHENS, at the least after
AEgeus death, bicause he had no children: when the sawe that Theseus
was knowen, and openly declared for his sonne and heire, and
suceessour to the Realme, they were not able any lenger to beare it,
seeing that not onely AEgeus (who was but the adopted sonne of
Pandion, and nothing at all of the bloude royall of the Erictheides)
had usurped the Kingdome over them, but that Theseus also should
enjoye it after his death. Whereupon they determined to make warre
with them both, and dividing them selves into two partes, the one came
openly in armes with their father, marching directly towardes the
citte: the other laye close in ambushe in the village GARGETTVS,
meaning to geve charge upon them in two places at one instant. Nowe
they brought with them an Heraulde borne in the towne of AGNVS, called
Leos, who bewrayed unto Theseus the secret and devise of all their
enterprise. Theseus upon this intelligence went forth, and dyd set on
those that laye in ambushe, and put them all to the sworde. The other
which were in Pallas companie understanding thereof, dyd breake and
disparse them selves incontinendy. And this is the cause (as some
saye) why those of Pallena doe never make affinitie nor mariadge with
those of AGNVS at this daye. And that in their towne when any
proclamation is made, they never speake these wordes which are cryed
every where els through out the whole countrye of ATTICA, Acouete
Leos, (which is as muche to saye, as Hearken, O people) they doe so
extreamely hate this worde Leos, for that it was the Herauldes name
which wrought them that treason. This done, Theseus who woulde not
live idelly at home and doe nothing, but desirous there withall to
gratifie the people, went his waye to fight with the bull of Marathon,
the which dyd great mischieves to the inhabitants of the countrye of
TETRAPOLIS. And having taken him ahve, brought him through the citie
of ATHENS to be scene of all the inhabitants. Afterwardes he dyd
sacrifice him unto Apollo Delphias. Nowe concerning Hecale, who was
reported to have lodged him, and to have geven him good enter-
teinment, it is not altogether untrue. For in the olde time, those
townes and villages thereaboutes dyd assemble together, and made a
common sacrifice which they called Hecalesion, in the honour ofjupiter
Hecalian, where they honoured this olde woman, calling her by a
diminutive name, Hecalena: bicause that when she receyved Theseus into
her house, being then but very younge, she made muche of him, and
called him by many prety made names as olde folkes are wont to call
younge children. And forasmuche as she had made a vowe to Jupiter to
make him a solemne sacrifice, if Theseus returned safe from the
enterprise he went about, and that she dyed before his returne: in
recompence of the good chere she had made him, she had that honour
done unto her by Theseus commaundement, as Philochorus hathe written
of it. Shortely after this exployte, there came certaine of King Minos
ambassadours out of CRETA, to aske tribute, being nowe the thirde time
it was demaunded, which the ATHENIANS payed for this cause. Androgeus,
the eldest sonne of king Minos, was slayne by treason within the
countrye of ATTICA: for which cause Minos pursuing the revenge of his
death, made very whotte and Sharpe warres upon the ATHENIANS, and dyd
them greate hurte. But besides all this, the goddes dyd sharpely
punishe and scourge all the countrye, as well with barrennes and
famine, as also with plague+ and other mischieves, even to the drying
up of their rivers. The ATHENIANS perceyving these sore troubles and
plagues, ranne to the oracle of Apollo, who aunswered them that they
shoulde appease Minos: and when they had made their peace with him,
that then the wrathe of the goddes woulde cease against them, and
their troubles should have an ende. Whereupon the ATHENIANS sent
immediately unto him, and entreated him for peace: which he graunted
them, with condition that they should be bounde to sende him yerely
into CRETA, seven younge boyes, and as many younge gyrles. Nowe thus
farre, all the historiographers doe very well agree: but in the reste
not. And they which seeme furdest of from the trothe, doe declare,
that when these yonge boyes were delivered in CRETA, they caused them
to be devowred by the Minotaure within the Laberinthe: or els that
they were shut within this Laberinthe, wandring up & downe, & coulde
finde no place to gett out, until suche time as they dyed, even
famished for hunger. And this Minotaure, as Euripides the Poet sayeth,
was A corps combynd, which monstrous might be deemd: A Boye, a Bull,
both man and beast it seemd. But Philochorus writeth, that the CRETANS
doe not confesse that, but saye that this Laberinthe was a stayle or
prisone, in the which they had no other hurte saving that they which
were kept there under locke and keye, coulde not flye nor starte
awaye: and that Minos had, in the memorye of his sonne Androgeus,
instituted games and playes of prise, where he gave unto them that
wanne the victorie, those younge children of ATHENS, the which in the
meane time notwithstanding were carefully kept and looked unto in the
prisone of the Laberinthe: and that at the first games that were kept,
one of the Kings captaines called Taurus, who was in best creditt with
his master, wanne the prise. This Taurus was a churlishe, and naughtie
natured man of condition, and very harde and cruell to these children
of ATHENS. And to verifie the same, the philosopher Aristotle him
selfe, speaking of the common wealth of the BOTTIEIANS, declareth very
well, that he never thought that Minos dyd at any time cause the
children of ATHENS to be put to death: but sayeth, that they poorely
toyled in CRETA even to crooked age, earning their living by true and
painefull service.  For it is written, that the CRETANS (to satisfie
an olde vowe of theirs which they had made of auncient time) sent
somtimes the first borne of their children, unto Apollo in the cittie
of DELPHES: and that amongest them they also mingled those, which were
descended of the auncient prisoners of ATHENS & they went with
them. But bicause they coulde not live there, they directed their
jorney first into ITALIE, where for a time they remained in the realme
of PVGLIA, and afterwardes from thence went into the confines of
THRACIA, where they had this name of BOTTIEIANS. In memory whereof,
the daughters of the BOTTIEIANS in a solemne sacrifice they make, doe
use to singe the foote of this songe: Lett us to ATHENS goe. But
thereby we maye see howe perilous a thing it is, to fall in
displeasure and enmitie with a cittie, which can speake well, and
where learning and eloquence dothe florishe. {posterity+} For ever
sence that time, Minos was all- wayes blased and disgraced through out
all the Theaters of ATHENS. The testimonie of Hesiodus, who calleth
him the most worthie King, dothe nothing helpe him at all, nor the
prayse of Homer, who nameth him Jupiters famillier friende: bicause
the tragical Poets gott the upper hande in disgracing him,
notwithstanding all these. And upon their stages where all the
tragedies were played, they still gave forth many ill favored wordes,
and fowle speaches of him: as against a man that had bene most cruell
and unnaturall. Yet most men thincke, that Minos was the King which
established the lawes: and Radamanthus the judge and preserver of
them, who caused the same also to be kept and observed. The time nowe
ben comen about for payment of the thirde tribute, when they came to
compell the fathers which had children not yet maried, to geve them to
be put forth to take their chaunce and lotte: {lottery+} the citizens
of ATHENS beganne to murmure against AEgeus, alledging for their
grieves, that he who onely was the cause of all this evill, was onely
alone exempted from this griefe. And that to bring the Government of
the Realme, to fall into the handes of a straunger his bastard: he
cared not though they were bereft of all their naturall children, and
were unnaturally compelled to leave and forsake them. These just
sorrowes and complaintes of the fathers whose children were taken from
them, dyd pearce the harte of Theseus, who willing to yelde to reason,
and to ronne the selfe same fortune as the cittizens dyd: willingly
offered him selfe to be sent thither, without regarde taking to his
happe or adventure. {grace+} For which, the cittizens greatly esteemed
of his corage and honorable disposition, and dearely loved him for the
good affection, he seemed to beare unto the comunaltye. But AEgeus
having used many reasons and perswasions, to cause him to turne, &
staye from his purpose, and perceyving in the ende there was no
remedye but he woulde goe: he then drue lottes for the children which
should goe with him. Hellanicus notwithstanding dothe write, that they
were not those of the cittie which drewe lottes for the children they
should sende, but that Minos him selfe went thither in persone and dyd
chuse them, as he chose Theseus the first, upon conditions agreed
betwene them: that is to wit, that the ATHENIANS shoulde furnishe them
with a shippe, and that the children should shippe and imbarke with
him, carying no weapons of warre: and that after the death of the
Minotaure, this tribute should cease. Nowe before that time, there was
never any hope of returne, nor of safetie of their children: therefore
the ATHENIANS allwayes sent a shippe to convey their children with a
blacke sayle, in token of assured losse. Nevertheles Theseus putting
his father in good hope of him, being of a good corage, and promising
boldly that he woulde sett upon this Minotaure: AEgeus gave unto the
master of the shippe a white sayle, {Tristram+} commaunding him that
at his returne he should put out the white sayle if his sonne had
escaped, if not, that then he should sett up the blacke sayle, to
shewe him a farre of his unlucky & unfortunate chaunce. Simonides
notwithaanding doeth saye, that this sayle which AEgeus gave to the
master, was not white, but redde, dyed in graine, and of the culler of
scarlett: and that he gave it him to signifie a farre of, their
deliverie and safety. This master was called Phereclus Amarsiadas, as
Simonides sayeth. But Philochorus writeth, that Scirus the SALAMINIAN
gave to Theseus a master called Nausitheus, and another marriner to
tackle the sayles, who was called Phaas: bicause the ATHENIANS at that
time were not greatly practised to the sea. And this did Scirus, for
that one of the children on whom the lott fell was his nephewe: & thus
muche the chappells doe testifie, which Theseus buylt afterwardes in
honour of Nausitheus, and of Phaas, in the village of Phalerus,
joyning to the temple of Scirus. And it is sayed moreover, that the
feaste which they call Cybernesia, that is to saye, the feaste of
Patrons of the shippes, is celebrated in honour of them. Nowe after
the lotts were drawen, Theseus taking with him the children allotted
for the tribute, went from the pallace to the temple called
Delphinion, to offer up to Apollo for him and for them, an offering of
supplication which they call Hiceteria: which was an olyve boughe
hallowed, wreathed about with white wolle. After he had made his
prayer, he went downe to the sea side to imbarke, the sixt daye of the
moneth of Marche: on which daye at this present time they doe sende
their younge girles to the same temple of Delphinion, there to make
their prayers and petitions to the goddes. But some saye, that the
oracle of Apollo in the cittie of DELPHES had aunswered him, that he
should take Venus for his guyde, and that he should call upon her to
conduct him in his voyage: for which cause he dyd sacrifice a stoate
unto her upon the sea side, which was founde sodainly turned into a
ramme, and that herefore they surnamed this goddesse Epitragia, as one
would saye, the goddesse of the ramme. Furthermore, after he was
arrived in CRETA, he slewe there the Minotaure (as the most parte of
auncient authors doe write) by the meanes and helpe of Ariadne: who
being fallen in fansie with him, dyd geve him a clue of threede, by
the helpe whereof she taught him how he might easely winde out of the
turnings and cranckes of the Labyrinthe. And they saye, that having
killed this Minotaure, he returned backe againe the same waye he went,
bringing with him those other younge children of ATHENS, whom with
Ariadne also he caried afterwardes awaye. Pherecides sayeth moreover,
that he brake the keeles or bottomes of all the shippes of CRETA,
because they should not sodainely sett out after them. And Demon
writeth, that Taurus (the captaine of Minos) was killed in a fight by
Theseus, even in the very haven mowthe as they were readye to shippe
awaye, and hoyse up sayle. Yet Philochorus reporteth, that king Minos
having sett up the games, as he was wont to doe yerely in the honour
and memorye of his sonne, every one beganne to envye captaine Taurus,
bicause they ever looked that he should carye awaye the game and
victorie, as he had done other yeres before: over and that, his
authoritye got him much ill will and envye, bicause he was proude and
stately, and had in suspition that he was great with queene
Pasiphae. {favorite+} Wherefore when Theseus required he might
encounter with Taurus, Minos easely graunted it. And being a Solemne
custome in CRETA that the women shoulde be present, to see these open
sportes and fights, Ariadne being at these games amongest the rest,
fell further in love with Theseus, seeing him so goodly a persone, so
stronge, and invincible in wrestling, that he farre exceeded all that
wrestled there that daye. King Minos was so glad that he had taken
awaye the honour from captaine Taurus, that he sent him home francke &
free into his countrye, rendring to him all the other prisoners of
ATHENS: and for his sake, clearely released and forgave the cittie of
ATHENS the tribute, which they should have payed him yerely. Howbeit
Clidemus searching out the beginning of these things to thutmost,
reciteth them very particularly, and after another sorte. For he
sayeth, about that time there was a generall restraint through out all
GRECE, restrayning all manner of people to beare sayle in any vessell
or bottome, wherein there were above five persones except only Jason,
who was chosen captaine of the great shippe Argus, and had commission
to sayle every where, to chase and drive awaye rovers and pyrates, and
to scoure the seas through out. About this time, Daedalus being fled
from CRETA to ATHFNS in a litle barke: Minos contrarie to this
restraint, woulde needes followe him with a fleete of divers vessels
with owers who being by force of weather driven to the coaste of
SICILE, fortuned to dye there. Afterwardes his sonne Deucalion, being
marveilously offended with the ATHENIANS, sent to summone them to
deliver Daedalus unto him, or els he woulde put the children to death,
which were delivered to his father for hostages. But Theseus excused
him selfe, and sayed he coulde not forsake Daedalus, considering he
was his neere kynseman, being germaine, for he was the sonne of
Merope, the daughter of Erichtheus. Howbeit by and by he caused nany
vessels secretly to be made, parte of them within ATTICA selfe in the
village of Thymetades, farre from any highe wayes: and parte of them
in the cittie of TROEZEN, by the sufferance of Pitheus his
grandfather, to the ende his Purpose shoulde be kept the
secretlyer. Afterwardes when all his shippes were readye, and rygged
out, he tooke sea before the CRETANS had any knowledge of it: in so
much as when they sawe them a farre of, they dyd take them for the
barkes of their friends. Theseus landed without resistaunce, and tooke
the haven. Then having Daedalus, and other banished CRETANS for
guydes, he entred the cittie selfe of GNOSVS, where he slewe Deucalion
in a fight before the gates of the Labyrinthe, with all his garde and
officers about him. By this meanes the kingdome of CRETA fell by
inheritance into the handes of his sister Ariadne. Theseus made league
with her, and caryed away the yong children of ATHENS, which were kept
as hostages, and concluded peace and amytie betweene the ATHENIANS and
the CRETANS: who promised, and sware, they would never make warres
against them. They reporte many other things also touching this
matter, & specially of Ariadne: but there is no trothe nor certeintie
in it. For some saye, that Ariadne honge her selfe for sorowe, when
she sawe that Theseus had caste her of. Other write, that she was
transported by mariners into the Ile of NAXOS, where she was maryed
unto OEnarus, the priest of Bacchus: and they thincke that Theseus
lefte her, bicause he was in love with another, as by these verses
shoulde appeare. AEgles the Nymphe, was loved of Theseus, which was
the daughter of Panopeus. Hereas the Megarian sayeth, that these two
verses in olde time were among the verses of the Poet Hesiodus,
howbeit Pisistratus tooke them awaye: as he dyd in like manner adde
these other here in the description of the helles in Homer, to
gratifie the ATHENIANS. Bolde Theseus, and Pirithous flowte, descended
both, from godds immortall race, Triumphing still, this wearie worlde
aboute in fears of armes, and many a comly grace.  Other holde
opinion, that Ariadne had two children by Theseus: the one of them was
named Oenopion, and the other Staphylus. Thus amongest others the Poet
Ion writeth it, who was borne in the Ile of CHIO, and speaking of his
cittie, he sayeth thus: OEnopion which was the sonne, of worthy
Theseus did cause men buylde, this stately towne which nowe triumpheth
thus. Nowe what things are founde seemely in Poets fables, there is
none but dothe in manner synge them. But one Paenon borne in the
cittie of AMATHVNTA, reciteth this cleane after another sorte, and
contrarie to all other: saying, that Theseus by tempest was driven
with the Ile of CYPRVS, having with him Ariadne, which was great with
childe, and so sore sea sycke, that she was not able to abide it. In
so muche as he was forced to put her a lande, and him selfe afterwards
returning abourde hoping to save his shippe against the storme, was
forthwith compelled to loose into the sea. The women of the countrye
dyd curteously receyve & intreate Ariadne: and to comforte her again,
(for she was marveilously oute of harte, to see she was thus forsaken)
they counterfeated letters, as if Theseus had wrytten them to her. And
when her groninge time was come, and she to be layed, they did their
best by all possible meanes to save her: but she dyed notwithstanding
in labour, and could never be delivered. So she was honorably buried
by the Ladies of CYPRVS. Theseus not long after returned thither
againe, who tooke her death marvelous heavily, and left money with the
inhabitantes of the countrie, to sacrifice unto her yearely: and for
memorie of her, he caused two litle images to be molten, the one of
copper, and the other of silver, which he dedicated unto her. This
sacrifice is done the seconde day of September, on which they doe yet
observe this ceremonie: they doe lay a young childe upon a bed, which
pitiefully cryeth and lamenteth, as women travellinge with
childe. They saye also, that the AMATHVSIANS doe yet call the grove
where her tombe is sette up, the wodde of Venus Adriadne. And yet
there are of the NAXIANS, that reporte this otherwise: saying, there
were two Minoes, and two Adriadnees, whereof the one was maried to
Bacchus in the Ile of NAXOS, of whome Staphylus was borne: and the
other the youngest, was ravished and caried away by Theseus, who
afterwardes forsooke her, and she came into the Ile of NAXOS with her
nurce, called Corcyna, whose grave they doe shewe yet to this
day. This seconde Adriadne dyed there also, but she had no such honour
done to her after her death, as to the first was geven. For they
celebrate the feaste of the first with all joye & mirthe: where the
sacrifices done in memorie of the seconde, be mingled with mourninge
and sorowe. Theseus then departing from the Ile of CRETA, arrived in
the Ile of DELOS, where he did sacrifice in the temple of Apollo, and
gave there a litle image of Venus, the which he had gotten of
Adriadne. Then with the other young boyes that he had delivered, he
daunced a kinde of daunce, which the DELIANS keepe to this day, as
they say: in which there are many turnes and returnes, much after the
turninges of the Labyrinthe. And the DELIANS call this manner of
daunce, the crane, as Dicaearcus sayeth. And Theseus daunced it first
about the altar, which is called Ceraton, that is to saye,
hornestaffe: bicause it is made and builded of hornes onely, all on
the left hande well & curiously sette together without any other
bindinge. It is sayed also that he made a game in this Ile of DELOS,
in which at the first was geven to him that overcame, a braunche of
palme for reward of victorie. But when they drewe neere the coast of
ATTICA, they were so joyfull, he and his mafter, that they forgate to
set up their white sayle, by which they shoulde have geven knowledge
of their healthe and safetie unto AEgeus. Who seeinge the blacke sayle
a farre of, being out of all hope evermore to see his sonne againe,
tooke such a griefe at his harte, that he threw him selfe headlong
from the top of a clyffe, and killed him selfe. So soone as Theseus
was arrived at the Porte named Phalerus, he performed the sacrifices
which he had vowed to the goddes at his departure: and sent an Herauld
of his before unto the city, to carie newes of his safe arrivall. The
Heraulde founde many of the citie mourning the death of king
AEgeus. Many other received him with great joy, as may be
supposed. They would have crowned him also with a garlande of flowers,
for that he had brought so good tidinges, that the children of the
citie were returned in safetie. The Heraulde was content to take the
garlande, yet would he not in any wise put it on his head, but did
winde it about fLs Hehislds rodde he bare in his hande, and so
returneth foorthwith to the sea, where Theseus made his
sacrifices. Who perceivinge they were not yet done, did refuse to
enter into the temple, and stayed without for troubling of the
sacrifices. Afterwardes all ceremonies finished, he went in and tolde
him the newes of his fathers death. Then he and his company mourning
for sorowe, hasted with speede towardes the citie. And this is the
cause, why to this day, at the feast called Oscophoria (as who woulde
say at the feast of boughes) the Herauld hath not his heade but his
rod onely crowned with flowers, and why the assistantes also after the
sacrifice done, doe make suche cryes and exclamations: Ele, leuf, iou,
iou: whereof the first is the crye and voyce they commonly use one to
an other to make haste, or else it is the foote of some songe of
triumphe: and the other is the crye and voyce of men as it were in
feare and trouble. After he had ended the obsequies and funeralls for
his father, he performed also his sacrifices unto Apollo, which he had
vowed the seventh day of the moneth of October, on which they arrived
at their returne into the citie of ATHENS. Even so the custome which
they use at this day, to seeth all manner of pulse, commeth of this:
that those which then returned with Theseus, did seeth in a great
brasse potte all the remaine of their provision, and therewith made
good chere together. Even in such sorte as this, came up the custome
to carie a braunch of olyve, wreathed about with wolle, which they
call Iresione: bicause at that time they caried boughes of
supplication, as we have told ye before. About which they hang all
sortes of fruites: for then barrennesse did cease, as the verses they
sang afterwards did witnesse. Bring him good bread, that is of savry
tast, with pleasaunt figges, and droppes of dulcet mell, Then sowple
oyle, his body for to bast, and pure good wine, to make him sleepe
full well. Howbeit there are some which will say, that these verses
were made for the Heraclides, that is to say, those descended from
Hercules: which flying for their safety and succour unto the
ATHENIANS, were entered and much made of by them for a time. But the
most parte holde opinion, they were made upon the occasion
aforesaid. The vessell in which Theseus went and was a galliot of
thirtie owers, which the ATHENIANS kept untill the time of Demetrius
the Phalerian, alwayes taking away the olde peeces of wodde that were
rotten, and ever renewing them with new in their places. So that ever
since, in the disputations of the Philosophers touching things that
increase, to wit, whether they e alwayes one, or else they be made
others: this galliot was alwayes brought in for an example of doubt.
For some maintained, that it was still one vessell: others to the
contrarie defended it was not so. And they holde opinion also, that
the feast of boughes which is celebrated at ATHENS at this time, was
then first of all instituted by Theseus. It is sayed moreover, that he
did not carye all the wenches upon whome the lotts did fall, but chose
two fayer young boyes, whose faces were swete and delicate as maydens
be, that otherwise were hardie, and quicke sprighted. But he made them
so oft bathe them selves in whotte bathes, and kepe them in from the
heate of the sunne, and so many times to washe, anointe, and rubbe
them selves with oyles which ferve to supple and smoothe their
skinnes, to keepe freshe and fayer their colour, to make yellowe and
bright their heares: and withall did teache them so to counterfeate
their speache, countenaunce and facion of young maydes, that they
seemed to be like them, rather then young boyes. For there was no
manner of difference to be perceived outwardly, and he mingled them
with the girles, without the knowledge of any man. Afterwards when he
was returned, he made a procession, in which both he and the other
young boyes, were apparelled then as they be nowe, which carie boughes
on the day of the feast in their handes. They carie them in the honor
of Bacchus and Ariadne, following the fable that is tolde of them: or
rather bicause they returned home just, at the time and season, when
they gather the fruite of those trees. There ate women which they call
Deipnophores, that is to say, caryers, which are assistantes to the
sacrifice done mothers of those, upon whom the lottes did fall,
bicause they in like sorte brought them meate and drinke. There they
tell tales for so did their mothers tattle to their children, to
comforte and encorage them. All these particularities were written by
Demon the historiographer. There was moreover a place chosen out to
build him a temple in, and he him selfe ordained, that those houses
which had payed tribute before unto the king of CRETA, should nowe
yearely thenceforth become contributories towardes the charges of a
solemne sacrifice, which shoulde be done in the honor of him: and he
did assigne the order and administration of the same, unto the house
of the Phytalides, in recompence of the curtesie which they showed him
when he arrived. Furthermore, after the death of his father AEgeus, he
undertooke a marvelous great enterprise. For he brought all the
inhabitantes of the whole province of ATTICA, to be within the citie
of ATHENS, and made them all one corporation, which were before
dispersed into diverse villages, and by reason thereof were very hard
to be assembled together, when occasion was offered to establish any
order concerning the common state. Many times also they were at
variance together, and by the eares, making warres one upon an
other. But Theseus tooke the paines to goe from village to village,
and from family, to familie, to let them understand the reasons why
they should consent unto it. So he found the poore people and private
men, ready to obey and followe his will but the riche, and such as had
authoritye in every village, all against it. Nevertheles he wanne
them, promising that it should be a common wealth, and not subject to
the power of any sole prince, but rather a populer state. {democracy+}
In which he woulde only reserve to him selfe the charge of the warres,
and the preservation of the lawes: for the rest, he was content that
every citizen in all and for all should beare a like swaye and
authoritye. So there were some that willingly graunted thereto. Other
who had no likin thereof, yielded notwithstanding for feare of his
displeasureand power which then was very great. So they thought it
better to consent with good will, unto that he required: then to tary
his forcible compulsion.  Then he caused all the places where justice
was ministred, and all their halles of assembly to be overthrowen and
pulled downe. He removed straight all judges and officers, and built a
towne house, and a counsaill hall, in the place where the cittie now
standeth, which the ATHENIANS CALL ASTY, but he called the whole
corporation of them ATHENS. Afterwardes he instituted the greate feast
and common sacrifice for all of the countrye of ATTICA, which they
call Panathenaea. Then he ordeined another feaste also upon the
sixtenth daye of the moneth of June, for all strangers which should
come to dwell in ATHENS, which was called Metaecia, and is kept even
to this daye. That done, he gave over his regall power according to
his promise, and beganne to sett up an estate or policye of a common
wealth, beginning first with the service of the goddes. To knowe the
good successe of his enterptise, he sent at the very beginning to the
oracle of Apollo in DELPHES, to enquire of the fortune of this cittye:
from whence this aunswer was brought unto him. O thou which arte, the
sonne of AEgeus, begott by him, on Pitheus daughter deare. The mightie
Jove, my father glorious, by his decree, hath sayed there shall
appeare, a fatall ende, of every cittie here. Which ende he will,
shall also come adowne, Within the walles, of this thy stately
towne. Therefore shewe thou, a valliant constant+ minde, and let no
care, nor carke thy harte displease. For like unto a bladder blowen
with winde thou shalt be tost, upon the surging seas. Yet lett no
dynte, of dolours thee disease. For why? thou shalt, nor perishe nor
decaye, nor be orecome, nor yet be cast awaye. {posterity+} It is
founde written also that Sibylla afterwardes gave out suche a like
oracle over the cittye of ATTHENS. The bladder blowen maye flete upon
the fludde, but cannot synke, nor sticke in filthie mudde. Moreover,
bicause he woulde further yet augment his people, and enlarge his
cittie, he entised many to come and dwell there, by offering them the
selfe same freedome and andf priviledges which the naturall borne
citizens had. So that many judge, that these w@ordes which are in use
at this daye in ATHENS, when any open proclamation is made, All
people, Come ye hither: be the selfe same which Theseus then caused to
be proclaymed, when he in that sorte dyd gather a people together of
all nations. Yet for all that he suffered not the great multitude that
came thither tagge and ragge, to be without distinction of degrees &
orders. {democracy+} For he first divided the noble men, from
hushandman and artificers, appointing the noblemen as judges and
magistrates to judge upon matters of Religion, & touching the service
of the godds: and of them also he dyd chuse rulers, to beare civill
office in the common weale, to determine the lawe, and to tell all
holy and divine things. By this meanes he made the noble men & the two
other estates equall in voyce. {3_estates+} And as the noblemen dyd
passe the other in honour: even so the artificers exceeded them in
number, & the hushandmen them in profit. Nowe that Theseus was the
first who of all others yelded to have a common weale or popuier
estate (as Aristotle sayeth) and dyd geve over his regaull power:
Homer self semeth to testifie it, in numbring the shippes which were
in the Grecians armie before the cittie of TROIA. For amongest all the
GRECIANS, he only calleth the ATHIFNIANS people. Moreover Theseus
coyned money, which he marked with the stampe of an oxe, in memorye of
the bulle of Marathon, or of Taurus the captaine of Minos, or els to
provoke his citizens to geve them selves to labour. They saye also
that of this money they were since called Hecatombaeon, and Docabaeon,
which signifieth worth a hundred oxen, and worth tenne
oxen. Furthermore having joyned all the territorie of the cittie of
MEGARA, unto the countrie of ATTICA, he caused that notable foure
square piret to be sett up for their confines within the straight of
PELOPONNESVS, and engraved thereuppon this superscription, that
declareth the separation of both the countries which confine there
together. The superscription is this. Where Titan doth beginne, bis
beames for to displaye even that waye stands Ionia, in fertile wise
allwaye And where againe he goeth, a downe to take his rest, there
stands Peloponnesus lande, for there I compt it west. It was he also
which made the games called Isthmia, after the imitation of Hercules,
to the ende that as the GRECIANS dyd celebrate the feast of games
called Olympia, in the honour of Jupiter, by Hercules ordinance: so,
that they should also celebrate the games called Isthmia, by his order
and institution, in the honout of Neptune. For those that were done in
the straights in the honour of Melicerus, were done in the night, and
had rather forme of sacrifice or of a mysterie, then of games and open
feast. Yet some will saye, that these games of Isthmia were instituted
in the honout and memorie of Sciron, and that Theseus ordained them in
satisfaction of his death: bicause he was his cosin germaine, being
the sonne of Canethus, and of Heniocha the daughter of Pitheus. Other
saye that it was Sinnis and not Sciron, and that for him Theseus made
these games, and not for the memorie of the other. Howsoever it was,
he specially willed the CORINTHIANS, that they should geve unto those
that came from ATHENS to see their games of Isthmia, so much place to
sit downe before them (in the most honorable parte of the feast place)
as the saile of their shippe should cover, in the which they came from
ATHENS: thus doe Hellanicus and Andron Halicarnasseus write
herof. Touching the voyage he made by the sea Major, Philochorus, and
some other holde opinion, that he went thither with Hercules against
the AMAZONES: and that to honour his valiantnes, Hercules gave him
ANTIOPA the AMAZONE. But the more parte of the other Historiographers,
namely Hellanicus, Pherecides, and Herodotus, doe write, that Theseus
went thither alone, after Hercules voyage, and that he tooke this
AMAZONE prisoner, which is likeliest to be true. For we doe not finde
that any other who went this jorney with him, had taken any AMAZONE
prisoner besides him selfe. Bion also the Historiographer, this
notwithstanding sayeth, that he brought her away by deceit and
stealth. For the AMAZONES (sayeth he) naturally loving men, dyd not
flie at all when they sawe them lande in their countrye, but sent them
presents, and that Theseus entised her to come into his shippe, who
brought him a present: and so sone as she was aborde, he hoysed his
sayle, and so carried her away. Another Historiographer Menecrates,
who wrote the storie of thc cittie of NICEA, in the countrye of
BYTHINIA, sayeth: that Theseus having this AMAZONE ANTIOPA with him,
remained a certaine time upon those coasts,& that amongest other he
had in his companie three younger brethern of ATHENS, Euneus, Thoas,
and Solois. This last, Solois, was marveilously in love with ANTIOPA,
and never bewrayed it to any of his other companions, saving unto one
with whom he was most familiar, & whom he trusted best: so that he
reported this matter unto ANTIOPA. But she utterly rejected his sute,
though otherwise she handled it wisely and curteously, and dyd not
complaine to Theseus of him. Howbeit the younge man despairing to
enjoye his love, tooke it so inwardly, that desperately he lept into
the river, and drowned him selfe. Which when Theseus understoode, and
the cause also that brought him to this desperation and ende: he was
very sorye, and angrie also. Whereupon he remembred a certeine oracle
of Pythia, by whom he was commaunded to buyld a cittie in that place
in a straunge countrye, where he should be most sorye, and that he
should leave some that were about him at that time, to governe the
same. For this cause therefore he built a cittie in that place, which
he named PYTHOPOLIS, bicause he bad built it only by the commaundement
of the Nunne Pythia. He called the river in the which the younge man
was drowned, Solois, in memorye of him: and left his two brethern for
his deputies and as governours of this newe cittie, with another
gentlemanof ATHENS, called Hermus. Here of it commeth, that at this
daye the PYTHOPOLITANS call, a certen place of their cittie, Hermus
house. But they fayle in the accent, by putting it upon the last
syllable: for in pronouncing it so, Hermu signffieth Mercurie. By this
meanes they doe transferre the honour due to the memorie of Hermus,
unto the god Mercurie. {posterity+} Now heare what was the occasion of
the warres of the AMAZONES, which me thinckes was not a matter of
small moment, nor an enterprise of a woman. For they had not placed
their campe within the very cittie of ATHENS, nor had not fought in
the very place it selfe (called Pnyce) adjoyning to the temple of the
Muses, if they had not first conquered or subdued all the countrye
thereabouts: neither had they all comen at the first, so valiantly to
assalle the cittie of ATHIENS. Now, whether they came by lande from so
farre a countrye, or that they passed over an arme of the sea, which
is called Bosphorus Cimmericus, being frosen as Hellanicus sayeth: it
is hardely to be credited. But that they camped, within the precinct
of the very cittie it selfe, the names of the places which continewe
yet to this present daye doe witnesse it, and the graves also of the
women which dyed there. But so it is, that hoth armies laye a great
time one in the face of the other, ere they came to battell. Howbeit
at the length Theseus having first made sacrifice unto Feare the
goddesse, according to the counsaill of a prophecie he had receyved,
he gave them battell in the moneth of August, on the same daye in the
which the ATHENIANS doe even at this present solemnise the feast,
which they call Boedromia. But Clidemus the Historiographer, desirous
particularly to write all the circumstances of this encownter, sayeth
that the left poynte of their battell bent towards the place which
they call AMAZONION: and that the right poynte marched by the side of
CHRYSA, even to the place which is called PNYCE, upon which, the
ATHENIANS comming towards the temple of the Muses, dyd first geve
their charge. And for proofe that this is true, the graves of the
women which dyed in this first encounter, are founde yet in the great
streete, which goeth towards the gate Piraica, neere unto the chappell
of the litle god Chalcodus. And the ATHENIANS (Sayeth he) were in this
place repulsed by the AMAZONES even to the place where the images of
Eumenides are, that is to saye, of the furies. But on thother side
also, the ATHENIANS comming towards the quarters of Palladium,
Ardettus, and Lucium, drave backe their right poynte even to within
their campe, and slewe a great number of them. Afterwards, at the ende
of foure moneths, peace was taken betwene them by meanes of one of the
women called Hyppolita. For this Historiographer calleth the AMAZONE
which Theseus maried, Hyppolita, and not Antiopa. Nevertheles, some
saye that she was slayne (fighting on Theseus side) with a darte, by
another called Molpadia. In memorie whereof, the piller which is
joyning to the temple of the Olympian ground, was set up in her
honour. We are not to marvell, if the historie of things so auncient,
be found so diversely written. For there are also that write, that
Queene Antiopa sent those secretly which were hurt then into the
cittie of CALCIDE, where some of them recovered, and were healed: and
others also dyed, which were buried neere to the place called
AMAZONION. Howsoever it was, it is most certain that this warre was
ended by agreement. For a place adjoyning to the temple of Theseus,
dothe beare recorde of it, being called Orcomosium: bicause the peace
was there by solemne othe concluded. And the sacrifice also dothe
truely verifie it, which they have made to the AMAZONES, before the
feast o Theseus, long time out of minde. They of MEGARA also doe shewe
a tumbe of the AMAZONES in their cittie, which is as they goe from the
market place, to the place they call Rhus: where they finde an
auncient tumbe, cut in facion and forme of a losenge. They saye that
there died other of the AMAZONES also, neere unto the cittie of
CHAERONEA, which were buried all alongest the litle broke passing by
the same, which in the olde time (in mine opinion) was called
Thermodon, and is nowe name Haemon, as we have in other places written
in the life Demosthenes. And it semeth also, that they dyd not pass
through THESSALIE, without fighting: for there are seen yet of their
tumbes all about the cittie of SCORVSA, hard by the rocks, which be
called the doggs head. And this is that which is worthy memorie (in
mine opinion) touching the warres of these AMAZONES. Howe the Poet
telleth that the AMAZONES made warres with Theseus to revenge the
injurie he dyd to their Queene Antiopa, refusing her, to marye with
Phaedra: and as for the murder which he telleth that Heracles dyd,
that me thinckes is altogether but devise of Poets. It is very true,
that after the death of Antiopa, Theseus maried Phaedra, having had
before of Antiopa a sonne called Hippolytus, or as the Poet Pindarus
writeth, Demothon. And for that the Historiographers doe not in any
thing speake against the tragicall Poets, in that which concerneth the
ill happe persones of this his wife and of his sonne: we must needs
take it to be so, as we finde it written in the tragedies. And yet we
finde many other reportes touching the mariages of Theseus, whose
beginnings had no great good honest ground, neither fell out their
endes very fortunate: and yet for all that they have made no tragedies
of them, neither have they bene played in the Theaters. For we reade
that he tooke away Anaxo the TROEZENIAN, and that after he had killed
Sinnis and Cercyon, he tooke their daughters perforce: and that he dyd
also marye Peribaea, the mother of Ajax, & afterwards Pherebaea, and
Joppa the daughter of Iphicles. And they blame him much also, for that
he so lightly forsooke his wife Ariadne, for the love of AEgles the
daughter of Panopaeus, as we have recited before. Lastely, he tooke
awaye Hellen: which ravishement filled all the Realme of ATTICA with
warres, and finally was the very occasion that forced him to forsake
his countrye, & brought him at the length to his ende, as we will tell
you hereafter. Albeit in his time other princes of GRECE had done many
goodly and notable exploits in the warres, yet Herodotus is of
opinion, that Theseus was never in any one of them: saving that he was
at the battell of the Lapithae, against the Centauri. Others saye to
the contrarie that he was at the jorney of Cholchide with Jason, and
that he dyd helpe Meleager to kill the wilde bore of Calydonia: from
whence (as they saye) this proverbe came: Not Without Theseus. Meaning
that suche a thing was not done without great helpe of
another. Howbeit it is certaine that Theseus self dyd many famous
actes, without ayde of any man, and that for his valiantnes this
proverbe came in use, which is spoken: This is another Theseus. Also
he dyd helpe Adras- tus king of the ARGIVES, to recover the bodyes of
those that were slayne in the battel, before the cittie of
THEBES. Howbeit it was not, as the poet Euripides sayeth, by force of
armes, after he had overcome the THEBANS in battel: but it was by
composition. And thus the greatest number of the most auncient writers
doe declare it. Furthermore, Philochorus writeth, that this was the
first treatie that ever was made to recover the dead bodyes slayne in
battel: nevertheles we doe reade in the histories and gestes of
Hercules, that he was the first that ever suffered his enemies to
carye awaye their dead bodyes, after they had bene put to the
sword. But whosoever he was, at this daye in the village of
ELEVTHERES, they doe showe the place where the people were buried, &
where princes tumbes are seene about the cittie of ELEVSIN, which he
made at the request of Adrastus. And for testimonie hereof,
thetragedie, AEschilus made of the ELEVSINIANS, where he causeth it to
be spoken even thus to Theseus him self, dothe clerely overthrowe the
petitioners in Euripides. Touching the friendshippe+ betwixt Pirithous
and him, it is sayed it beganne thus. The renowne of his valliancy was
marvelously blowen abroade through all GRECE, & Pirithous desirous to
knowe it by experience, went even of purpose to invade his countrye,
and brought awaye a certaine bootie of oxen of his taken out of the
countrye of MARATHON. Theseus being advertised therof, armed straight,
and went to the rescue. Pirithous heearing of his comming, fled not at
all, but returned backe sodainbly to mete him. And so sone as they
came to see one another, they both wondred at eche others beawtie and
corage, and so had they no desire to fight. But Pirithous reaching out
his hande first to Theseus, sayed unto him. I make your selfe judge of
the damage you have susteined by my invasion, and with all my harte I
will make such satisfaction, as it shall please you to assesse it
at. Theseus then dyd not only release him, of all the damages he had
done, but also requested him he would become his friend, and brother
in armes. Hereupon they were presently sworne brethren in the fielde:
after which othe betwixt them, Pirithous maried Deidamia, and sent to
praye Theseus to come to his mariage, to visite his countrye, and to
make merye with the Lapiths. He had bidden also the Centauri to the
feast: who being druncke, committed many lewde partes, even to the
forcing of women. Howbeit the Lapithae chasticed them so well, that
they slewe some of them presently in the place, and drave the rest
afterwards out of all the countrye by the helpe of Theseus, who armed
him selfe, and fought on their side. Yet Herodotus writeth the matter
somewhat contrarie, saying that Theseus went not at all untill the
warre was well begonne: and that it was the first time that he sawe
Hercules, and spake with him neere unto the cittie of TRACHINA, when
he was then quiet, having ended all his farre voyages, and greatest
troubles. They reporte that this meeting together was full of great
cheere, much kindness and honorable entertainement betwene them, and
howe great curtesie+ was offred to eache other. Nevertheles me thincke
we should geve better credit to those writers that saye they mett many
times together, and that Hercules was accepted and receyved into the
brotherhed of the mysteries of ELEVSIN, by the meanes of the
countenaunce & favour which Theseus showed unto him: and that his
purification also was thereby allowed of, who was to be purged of
necessitie of all his ill deedes & cruelties, before he could enter
into the companie of those holy mysteries. Furthermore, Theseus was
fiftie yeres olde when he tooke awaye Hellen and ravished her, which
was very younge, and not of age to be maried, as Hellanicus sayeth. By
reason whereof, some seeking to hyde the ravishement of her as a
haynous facte, doe reporte it was not he, but one Idas and Lynceus
that caryed her awaye, who left her in his custodie and keeping: and
that Theseus would have kept her from them, and would not have
delivered her to her brethern Castor and Pollux, which afterwardes dyd
demaunde her againe of him. Others againe saye it was her owne father
Tyndarus, who gave her him to keepe, for that he was affraye of
Enarsphorus the sonne of Hippocoon, who would have had her away by
force. But that which commeth nearest to the trothe in this case, and
which in deede by many authors is testified, was in this
sorte. Theseus and Pirithous went together to the cittie of
LACEDAEMON, where they tooke awaye Hellen (being yet very younge) even
as she was dauncing in the temple of Diana surnamed Orthia: and they
fled for life. They of LACEDAEMON sent after her, but those that
followed went no further then the cittie of TEGEA. Now when they were
escaped out of the countrye of PELOPONNESVS, they agreed to drawe lots
together, which of them two should have her, with condition that whose
lot it were to have her, he should take her to his wife, and should be
bound also to helpe his companion to get him another. It was Theseus
happe to light upon her, who caryed her to the cittie of APHIDNES,
bicause she was yet to younge to be maried. Whether he caused his
mother to come to bring her up, and gave his friend called Aphidnus
the charge of them both, recommending her to his good care, and to
kepe it so secretly, that no bodye should know what was become of
her. Bicause he would doe the like for Pirithous (according to
th'agrement made betwext them) he went into EPIRVS with him to steale
the daughter of Aidoneus, king of the MOLOSSIANS, who had surnamed his
wife Proserpina, his daughter Proserpina, and his dogg Cerberus: with
whom he made them fight, which came to aske his daughter in maruiage,
promising to geve her to him that should overcome his Cer- berm. But
the King understanding that Pirithous was come, not to request his
daughter in mariage, but to steale her away, he tooke him prisoner
with Theseus: & as for Pirithous, he caused him presently to be torne
in peces with his dogge, and shut Theseus up in close prison. In this
meane time there was one at ATHENS called Menestheus, the sonne of
Peteus: which Peteus was the sonne of Orneus, and Orneus was the sonne
of Erictheus. This Menectheus was the first that beganne to flatter+
the people, and did seeke to winne the favour of the communalde, by
sweete entising words: by which devise he stirred up the chiefest of
the cittie against Theseus (who in deede long before beganne to be
wearie of him) by declaring unto them howe Theseus had taken from them
their royalties and signiories, and had shut them up in suche sorte
within the wastes of a cittie, that he might the better keepe them in
subjection and obedience in all things, after his will. The poore
inferiour sorte of people, he did stirre up also to rebellion,
persuading them that it was no other then a dreame of libertie which
was promised them: and howe contrariwise they were clearely dispossest
and throwen out of their own houses, of their temples, and from their
naturall places where they were borne, to thend only, that in liewe of
many good and loving lordes which they were wont to have before, they
should now be compelled to serve one onely hedde, and a straunge
lorde. Even as Menestheus was very hotte about this practise, the
warre of the Tyndarides fell out at that instant, which greatly
furthered his pretence. For these Tyndarides (to wit children of
Tyndarus) {genl_reader+} Castor & Pollux, came downe with a great
armie, against the cittie of ATHENS: and some suspect sore that
Menestheus was cause of their comming thither. Howbeit at the first
entrie they dyd no hurte at all in the countrye, but only demaunded
restitution of their sister. To whom the citizens made aunswer, that
they knewe not where she was left: and then the brethern beganne to
make spoyle, and offer warre in deede. Howbeit there was one called
Academus, who having knowledge (I can not tell by what meane) that she
was secretly hidden in the cittie of ATHENS, revealed it unto them. By
reason whereof the Tyndarides did alwayes honour him very much, so
long as he lived, and afterwards the LACEDAEMONIANS, having ofte burnt
& destroyed the whole countrye of ATTICA throughout, they would yet
never touch the Academy of ATHENS for Academus sake. Yet Dicearchus
sayeth, that in the armie of the Tyndarides there were two Arcadians,
Echedemus, and Marathon, and howe of the name of one of them, it was
then called the place of Echedemie, which sithence hath bene called
Academia: and after the name of the other, there was a village called
MARATHON, bicause he willingly offered him self to be sacrificed
before the battell, as obeying the order and commandement of a
prophecies. So they went and pitched their campe before the cittie of
APHIDNES, and having wonne the battel, and taken the cittie by
assault, they raced the place. They saye that Alycus, the sonne of
Sciron was slaine at this field, who was in the hoaste of the
Tyndarides, and that after his name, a certaine quarter of the
territorie of MEGARA was called Alycus, in the which his bodye was
huried. Howbeit Hereas writeth that Theseus self dyd kill him before
Aphidnes: In witness whereof he alledgeth certain verses which speake
of Alycus. While as he sought with alibis might and mayne (in thy
defence, fayer Hellen for to fight) In Aphidnes, upon the pleasaunt
playne, bold Theseus to cruell deathe him dight. Howbeit it is not
likely to be true, that Theseus being there, the cittie of Aphidnes,
and his mother also were taken. But when it was wonne, they of ATHENS
beganne to quake for feare, and Menistheus counselled them to receyve
the Tyndarides into the cittie, and to make them good chere, so they
would make no warres but upon Theseus, which was the first that had
done them the wrong and injurie: and that to all other els they should
showe favour and good will. And so it fell out. For when the
Tyndarides had all in their power to doe as they listed, they
demaunded nothing els but that they might be received into their
corporation, and not to be reckoned for straungers, no more then
Hercules was: the which was graunted the Tyndarides, & Aphidnus dyd
adopt them for his children as Pylius had adopted Hercules. Moreover
they dyd honour them as if they had bene godds, calling them
Anaces. Either bicause they ceased the warres, or for thatb they
oredered themselves so well, that their whole armie being lodged in
the cittie, there was not any hurt done to any persone: but as it
became those th at have the charge of any thing, they did carefully
watche to preserve the good quiet thereof. All which this Greke word
Anacos doth signifie, wherof perchaunce it comes that they call the
Kings Anactes. There are others also who holde opinion that they were
called Anaces, bicause of their starres which appeared in the
ayer. For the Attican tongue sayeth, Anacas, & Anecathen: where the
comon people saye Ano, and Anothen, that is to saye,
above. Nevertheles AEthra, Theseus mother, was caried prisoner to
LACEDAEMON, and from thence to TROIA with Hellen, as some saye: and as
Homer him self doth witnesse in his verses, where he speaketh of the
women that followed Hellen. AEthra the daughter deare of Pitheus aged
Syre, and with her fayer Clymene she, whose eyes most men desire. Yet
there are other who as-well reject these two verses, and mainteine the
are not Homers: as also they reprove all that is reported of
Munychus. To wit, that Laodice being prively conceived of him by
Demophon, he was brought up secretly by AEthra within TROIA. But
Hifter the historien in his thirtenth of his histories of ATTICA,
maketh a recitall farre contrary to other, saying: that some hold
opinion, that Paris Alexander was slayne in battel by Achilles, and
Patroclus in the countrye of THESSALIE, neere to the river of
Sperchius, and that his brother Hector tooke the cittie of TROEZEN,
from whence he brought away Aethra: in which there is no manner of
apparance or likelihodde. But Adoneus king of the MOLOSSIANS, feasting
Hercules one daye as he passed through his realme, descended by
chaunce into talke of Theseus and of Pirithous, howe they came to
steale away his daughter secretly: and after told how they were also
punished. Hercules was marvellous sorye to underaand that one of them
was now dead, and the other in daunger to dye, and thought with him
self that to make his mone to Adoneus, it would not helpe the matter:
he besought him only that he would deliver Theseus for his sake. And
he graunted him. Thus Theseus being delivered of this captivitie,
returned to ATHENS where his friends were not altogether kept under by
his enemies: & at his returne he dyd dedicate to Hercules all the
temples, which the cittie had before caused to be built in his owne
honour. And where first of all they were called Thesea, he did now
surname them all Herculea, excepting foure, as Philochorus
writeth. Nowe when he was arrived at ATHFNS, he would immediately have
commaunded and ordered things as he was wont to doe: but he found him
self troubled much with sedition, bicause those who had hated him of
long time, had added also to their old canckered hate, a disdain and
contempt to feare him any more. And the comon people now were become
so stubborn, that where before they would have done all that they were
commanded, & have spoken nothing to the contrarie: now they looked to
be borne with, and flattered. Whereupon Theseus thought at the first
to have used force, but he was forced by the faction and contention of
his enemies to let all alone, and in the end, despairing he should
ever bring his matters to passe to his desire, he secretly sent away
his children into the Ile of EVBOEA, to Elphenor the sonne of
Chalcoctus. And him self, after he had made many wishes and curses
against the Athenians, in the village of Gargettus, in a place which
for that cause to this daye is called Araterion: (that is to saye, the
place of cursings) he did take the seas, and went into the Ile of
SCIROS, where he had goods, and thought also to have founde
friends. Lycomedes raigned at that time, and was king of the Ile, unto
whom Theseus made request for some lande, as intending to dwell there:
albeit some saye that he required him to give him ayde against the
Athenians. Lycomedes, were it that he douted to entertaine so great a
personage, or that he dyd it to gratifie Menestheus: caried him up to
the high rocks, faining as though he would from thence have shewed him
all his countrye round about. But when he had him there, he threw him
downe hedlong from the toppe of the rocks to the bottome, and put him
thus unfortunately to death. Yet other write, that he fell down of him
self by an unfortunate chaunce, walking one daye after supper as he
was wont to doe. There was no man that time that dyd followe or pursue
his death, but Menestheus quietly remained king of ATHENS: and the
children of Theseus, as private souldiers followed Elphenor in the
warres of TROIA. But after the death of Menesdtheus, who died in the
jomey to TROIA, Theseus sonnes returned unto ATHENS, where they
recovered their state. Sithence there were many occasions which moved
the Athenians to reverence and honour him as a demy god.  For in the
battel of Marathon, many thought they saw his shadow and image in
armes, fighting against the barbarous people. And after the warres of
the Medes (the yere wherein Phaadon was governour of ATHENS) the nunne
Pithia answered the Athenians, who had sent to the oracle of Apollo:
that they should bring backe the bones of Theseus, and putting them in
some honorable place, they should preserve and honour them
devoutely. But it was a harde matter to finde his grave: and if they
had founde it, yet had it bene a harder thing to have brought his
bones awaye, for the malice of those barbarous people which inhabited
that Ile: which were so wild and fierce, that none could trade or live
with them. Not-withstanding Cimon having taken the Iland (as we have
written in his life) and seeking his grave: perceived by good happe an
ea e pecking with her beake, and scragging with her clawes in a place
of some prety height. Straight it came into his minde (as by divine
inspiration) to searche and digge the place: where was founde the
tumbe of a great bodye, with the head of a speare which was of brasse,
and a sword with st. All which things were brought to ATHENS by Cimon
in the admirall gallie. The Athenians received them with great joye,
with processions & goodly sacrifices, as if Theseus him self had bene
a live, and had returned into the cittie againe. At this daye all
these relicks lye yet in the middest of the circle, neere to the place
where the younge men doe use all their exercises of bodye. There is
free libertie of accesse for all slaves and poore men, (that are
afflicted and pursued, by any mightier then themselves) to pray and
sacrifice in remembraunce of Theseus: who while he lived was
protectour of the oppressed, and dyd curteously receive their requests
and petitions that prayed to have ayde of him. The greatest and most
solemne sacrifice they doe unto him, is on the eight daye of October,
in which he return- ed from CRETA, with the other younge children of
ATHENS. Howbeit they doe not leave to honour him every eight daye of
all other moneths, either bicause he arrived from TROEZEN at ATHENS
the eight daye of June, as Diodorus the Cosmographer writeth: or for
that they thought that number to the meetest for him, bicause the
bruite ranne he was begotten of Neptune. {posterity+} They doe
sacrifice also to Neptune, the eight daye of every moneth, bicause the
number of eight is the first cube made of even number, and the double
of the first square: which dothe represent a stedfastnes immoveable,
properly attributed to the might of Neptune, whom for this cause we
surname Asibalius, and Gaiochus, which by interpretation dothe
signifie: the safe keeper, & the stayer of the earthe. The ende of
Theseus life.  The Life of Romulus+ THE historiographers doe, not
agree in their writings, by whom, nor for what cause, the great name
of the cittie of ROME (the glorie wherof is blowen abroad through all
the worlde) was first geven unto it. For some thincke that the
Pelasgians, after they had overcome the greatest parte of the world,
and had inhabited and subdued many nations, in the ende dyd staye them
selves in that place where it was newe buylded: and for their great
strength and power in armes, they gave the name of ROME unto the
cittie, as signifying power in the Greeke tongue. Other saye, that
after the taking and destruction of TROYA, there were certaine TROYANS
which saving them selves from the sworde, tooke suche vessells as they
founde at adventure in the haven, and were by winds put with the
THVSCANE shore, where they anckred neere unto the river of
Tyber. There their wives being so sore sea sicke, that possibly they
could not any ROMVLVS more endure the boisterous surges of the seas:
it happened one of them among the rest (the noblest and wisest of the
companie) called ROMA, to counsaill the other women of her companions
to set their shippes a fire, which they dyd accordingly. Wherewith
their husbands at the first were marvelously offended. But afterwards,
being compelled of necessitie to plant them selves neere unto the
cittie of PALLANTIVM, they were appeased when they sawe things prosper
better then they hoped for, finding the soyle there fertile, and the
people their neighhours civill and gentle in entertaining
them. Wherefore amongest other honours they dyd to requite this
lady. Roma, they called their cittie after her name, as from whom came
the originall cause of the building & foundation thereof. They saye
that from thence came this custome continuing yet to this daye at
ROME, that the women saluting their kinsefolkes and husbands doe kisse
them in the mouthe, for so dyd these TROYAN ladyes to please their
husbands, and to winne them againe, after they had lost their favours,
and procured their displeasures with burning of their shippes. Other
saye that Roma was the daughter of Italus, and of Lucaria, or els of
Telephus the sonne of Hercules, and of the wife of AEneas: other saye
of Ascanius, the sonne of AEneas, who named the cittie after her
name. Other holde opinion that it was Romanus (the sonne of Ulysses
and of Circe) that first founded ROME: other will saye that it was
Romus the sonne of Emathion, whom Diomedes sent thither from
TROYA. Other write that it was one Romis a tyranne of the LATINES, who
drave the THVSCANS out of those partes: which departing out of
THESSALY went first of all into LYDIA, and afterwards from LYDIA into
ITALIE. And furthermore, they who thincke that Romulus (as in deede it
carieth best likelyhod) was he that gave the name to the cittie, doe
not agree about his auncesters. For some ROMVLVS of them write, that
he was the sonne of AEneas & of Dexithea the daughter of Phorbus, and
that he was brought into ITALIE of a litle childe with his brother
Remus: and that at that time the river of Tyber being overflowen, all
other shippes were cast awaye, saving the shippe in which the two
litle boyes were, which by great good happe came to a staye upon a
very plaine even grounde on the bancke, and bicause the children
beyond all hope were saved by this meanes, therefore the place was
afterwardes called ROMA. Other saye that Roma the daughter of the
first Trojan ladye was maried unto Latinus the sonne of Telemachus, by
whom she had Romulus. Other write, that it was AEmilia, the daughter
of AEneas and of Lavinia, which was gotten with childe by the god
Mars. Other tell a tale of Romulus birth, nothing true nor likely. For
it is sayed that there was sometime a king of ALBA named Tarchetius, a
very wicked and cruell man in whose house through the permission of
the goddes appeared such a like vision: that there rose up in the
harthe of his chymney the forme and facion of a mans privie member,
which continued there many dayes. And they saye, that at that time
there was in THVSCANE an oracle of Thetis, from whom they brought unto
this wicked king Tarchetius suche an aunswer: that he should cause his
daughter yet unmaried to have carnall companie with the straunge
thing, for she should beare a sonne, that should be famous for his
valliancie, for strength of bodye, and his happie successe wherein he
should exceede all men of his time. Tarchetius tolde this oracle unto
one of his daughters, and willed her to entertaine this straunge
thing: but she disdaining to doe it, sent one of her waiting women to
undertake the entertainement. But Tarchetius was so mad at this, that
he caused them both to be taken to put them to death: howbeit the
goddesse Vega appeared to him in his sleepe in the night, & charged
him he should not doe it. Where- ROMVLVS upon he dyd commaund them to
make him a pece of clothe in the prisone, with promise that they
should be maried when they had finished it. These poore maydes toyled
at it all the live longe daye, but in the night there came other (by
Tarchetims commaundement) that dyd undoe all they had done the daye
before. {Penelope+} In the meane time, this waiting woman that was
gott with childe by this straunge thing, was delivered of two goodly
boyes or twynnes: whom Tarchetius gave unto one Teratius, with
expresse commaundement he should cast them awaye. This Teratius caryed
them unto the bancke of the river: thither came a shee woulfe and gave
them sucke, and certaine byrdes that brought litle crommes and put
them in their mouthes, untill a swyneheard perceyving them, and
wondring at the sight, dyd boldly goe to the children, and tooke them
awaye with him. These infantes being thus preserved after they were
come to mans state, dyd set upon Tarchetius and slewe him. One
Promathion an Italian writer, delivereth this storie thus. But the
reporte that carieth best credit of all, and is allowed of by many
writers: commeth from Diocles Peparethian, (whome Fabius Pictor
followeth in many thinges) who was the first that put forth this
storie among the GRECIANS, and specially the chiefest poynts of
it. Though this matter be somewhat diversely taken, yet in effect the
storie is thus. The right line and bloude of the kings of ALBA
descended from, AEneas, by succession from the father to the sonne,
and the Kingdome fell in the ende betweene two brethern, Numitor and
Amulius. They agreed by lotte to make division betweene them, whereof
the one to have the Kingdome, and the other all the golde, sylver,
readye money, goodes, and juells brought from TROIA. Numitor by his
lot chose the Realme for his portion: Amulius having all the golde and
treasure in his handes, did find him selfe thereby the stronger, and
so dyd easely take his ROMVLVS Realme from him. And fearing least his
brothers daughter might have children which one day might thrust him
out againe, he made her a Nunne of the goddesse Vesta, there to passe
her dayes in virginitie, and never to be maried: (some call her Rhea,
other Sylvia, and other Ilia) nevertheles not longe after she was
founde with childe, against the rule and profession of the Vestall
Nunnes. So nothing had saved her from present death, but the petition
of Antho the daughter of king Amulius, who intreated her father for
her life: yet notwithstanding she was straightly locked up, that no
body could see her, nor speake with her, least she should be brought a
bedde without Amulius knowledge. In the ende she was delivered of two
fayre boyes and marvellous great twynnes: which made Amulius more
affrayed then before. So he commaunded one of his men to take the two
children, & to throwe them awaye, and destroye them. Some saye that
this servants name was Faustulus: other thincke it was he that brought
them up. But whosoever he was, he that had the charge to throwe them
awaye, put them in a troughe, and went towards the river with
intention to throwe them in. Howbeit he found it risen so highe, and
running so swiftely, that he durst not come neere the waters side, &
so they being in the troughe, he layed them on the bancke. {Moses+} In
the meane time the river swelling still, & over-flowing the bancke, in
such sorte that it came under the troughe: dyd gently lifte up the
troughe, and caried it unto a great playne, called at this present
Cermanum, and in the olde time Germanum (as I take it) bicause the
Romaines called the brothers of father and mother, Germani. Nowe there
was neere unto this place a wilde figge tree which they called
Ruminalis, of the name of Romulus as the most parte thought: or els
bicause the beasts feeding there were wont to come under the same in
the ex-treame heate of the daye, and there dyd Ruminare, that ROMVLVS
is, chewe their cudde in the shadowe: or perhappes bicause that the
two children dyd sucke the teate of the woulfe, which the auncient
LATINES call RVMA, & they at this day doe yet call the goddesse on
whom they crye out to geve their children sucke, RVMILIA. And in their
sacrifices to her they use no wine, but offer up milke and water
mingled with honye. To these two children lying there in this sorte,
they write, there came a she woulfe and gave them sucke: and a hitwaw
also which dyd helpe to norishe and keepe them. These two beastes are
thought to be consecrated to the god Mars, and the LATINES doe
singularly honour and reverence the hitwaw. This dyd much helpe to
geve credit to the wordes of the mother, who affirmed she was
conceyved of those two children, by the god Mars. Howbeit some thincke
she was deceyved in her opinion: for Amulius that had her maidenhead,
went to her all armed, & perforce dyd ravishe her. Other holde opinion
that the name of the nurce which gave the two children sucke with her
breastes, gave occasion to common reporte to erre much in this tale,
by reason of the double signification thereof. For the LATINES doe
call with one selfe name shee woulfes Lupas, and women that geve their
bodyes to all commers: as this nurce the wife of Faustulus (that
brought these children home to her house) dyd use to doe. By her right
name she was called Acca Laurentia, unto whom the ROMAINES doe
sacrifice yet unto this daye: and the priest of Mars doth offer unto
her, in the moneth of Aprill, the sheading of wine and milke
accustomed at burialls, and the feast it selfe is called Larentia. It
is true that they honour also another Larentia, for like occasion. The
clercke or sexten of Hercules temple,not knowing one daye howe to
drive awaye the time as it should seeme: of a certaine livelines and
boldness dyd desire the god Hercules to playe at dyce with him, with
condition that if he dyd winne, Hercules ROMVLVS should be bounde to
send him some good fortune: and if it were his lucke to lose, then he
promised Hercules he would provide him a very good supper, and would
besides bring him a fayer gentlewoman to lye with all. The conditions
of the playe thus rehearsed, the sexten first cast the dyce for
Hercules, and afterwards for him selfe. It fell out that Hercules
wanne, and the sexten meaning good fayth, and thincking it very mete
to performe the bargaine that him selfe had made, prepared a good
supper, and hyered this Laurentia the courtesan, which was very fayer,
but as yet of no great fame to come to it. Thus having feasted her
within the temple, & prepared a bedde readye there, after supper he
locked her into the temple, as if Hercules should have comen in dede
and layen with her. And it is said for trothe, that Hercules came
thither: and commaunded her in the morning she should goe into the
market place, and salute the first man she met, and kepe him ever for
her friend. Which thing she performed, and the first man she met was
called Tarrutius, a man of great yeres, and one that had gathered
together marvellous wealth and riches. He had no children at all,
neither was he ever maried. He fell acquainted with this Laurentia,
and loved her so dearely, that shortely after chauncing to dye, he
made her heire of all he had: whereof she disposed afterwards by her
last will & testament, the best & greatest parte unto the people of
Rome. Moreover it is reported also, that she now being growen to be
famous and of great honour (as thought to be the lemman of a god) dyd
vanishe away sodainely in the self same place, where the first
Laurentia was butied. The place at this day is called Velabrum:
bicause the river being overflowen, they were oftentimes compelled to
passe by bote to goe to the market place, and they called this manner
of ferrying over, Velatura. Other saye, that those tomblers and common
players, which shewed sundrye ROMVLVS games and pastimes to winne the
favour of the people, were wont to cover that passage over with canvas
clothes and veyles, by which they goe from the market place to the
lystes or shewe place where they ronne their horses, beginning their
race even at the place: & they call a veyle in their tongue,
Velum. This is the cause why the seconde Laurentia is honored at
Rome. Faustulus, chief neateheard to Amulius, tooke up the two
children and no bodye knewe it, as some saye: or as other reporte,
(and likest to be true) with the privitie and knowledge of Numitor,
Amulius brother, who secretly furnished them with money that brought
up the two young children. It is sayed also they were both conveyed
unto the cittie of the GABIANS, where they were brought up at schole,
and taught all other honest things, which they use to teache the
sonnes and children of good and noble men. Further they saye they were
named Remus and Romulus, bicause they were founde sucking on the
teates of a woulfe. Nowe the beawtie of their bodyes dyd presently
shewe, beholding onely but their stature and manner of their
countenaunces, of what nature & linadge they were: and as they grewe
in yeres, their manly corage increased marvelously, so as they became
stowte and hardy men, in so much as they were never troubled or
astonied at any daunger that was offered them. Howbeit it appeared
plainely that Romulus had more wit and understanding then his brother
Remus. For in all things wherein they were to deale with their
neighbours, either concerning hunting, or the boundes and limites of
their pastures: it was easely discerned in him, that he was borne to
commaund, and not to obeye. For this cause they were both exceedingly
beloved of their companions, and of those which were their
inferiours. {friend+} As for the kings heardmen, they passed not muche
for them, saying that they were even like them selves, and so seemed
not to care a Pynne for their anger ROMVLVS or displeasure, but wholy
gave them selves to all gentlemanly exercises {games+} and trades,
thincking to live idely and at ease without travell, was neither comly
nor convenient: but to exercise and harden their bodyes with hunting,
running, pursuing murderers and theeves, and to helpe those which were
oppressed with wronge and violence, should be credit and commendation
to them. By reason whereof, in very shorte time they grewe to great
fame and renowne. And it fell out by chaunce there rose some stryfe
and variance betwene the heardmen of Amulius, and the heardmen of
Numitor: in so muche as those that were Numitors, caryed awaye by
force some cattell of the others. Thother side would not beare that,
but pursued fast after, and beating them well favoredly, they made
them take their legges, and brought backe againe the greatest parte of
the cattell they had caried away with them. Wherat Numitor stormed
marveilously, but yet his men seemed to make but litle accoumpt of it,
and purposing revenge, they gathered about them a good companie of
vagabonds (that had neither home, nor resting place) and certaine
fugitive bonde men which they intised ill favoredly, incoraging them
to steale awaye from their masters. Thus one daye whilest Romulus was
busie about some sacrifice, (being a devoute man and religious, and
well geven to serve the goddes, & to learne to divine & tell before
hande what things should happen & come to passe) it happened the heard
men of Numitor to meete Remus very slenderly accompanied: so they fell
upon him sodainely, blowes were delt rowndely on bothe sides, and men
were hurte on either parte. Howbeit Numitors men in the ende proved
the stronger parte, and dyd take Remus by force, and caryed him
straight before Numitor, alledging many complaintes and matters
against him. Numitor durst not punish him of his owne authoritie,
hicause he feared his brother Amulius, who was somewhat ROMVLVS
terrible: but went unto him, and earnestly besought him to doe him
justice, and not to suffer him being his owne brother, to receyve such
injurye of his men. There was not a man in the cittie of ALBA, but dyd
greatly mislike the injurie done to Numitor: and spake it openly, that
he was no persone to be offered such a wronge. In so muche as Amulius
moved herewith, dyd deliver Remus into his handes, to punishe him as
he thought good. Whereupon Numitor caried him home with him. But when
he had him in his house, he beganne to consider better of him, with
admiration howe goodly a younge man he was, howe in height and
strength of bodye he passed all the rest of his people: and perceyving
in his face an assured constancie+, and bolde stedfast corage that
yelded not, nor was abashed for any daunger he sawe toward him: and
hearing also the reporte of his actes and manhod to be aunswerable to
that he sawe: (being chiefly moved in mine opinion by some secret
inspiration of the goddes, which ordaine the depthe of great matters)
beganne partely by conjecture, and partely by chaunce to take a
conceit of him. So he asked him what he was, and who was his father &
mother: speaking to him in a more gentle wise, and with a friendlier
countenaunce then before, to make him the bolder to answer, and be of
better hope. Remus boldly aunswered him. Truely I will not hide the
trothe from thee, for thou seemest to me more worthie to be King, then
thy brother Amulius. For thou enquierest, and hearest first before
thou condenmest: and he condemneth before he examine or heare the
parties. Untill nowe, we thought we had bene the children of two of
the Kings servants, to wit of Faustulus and of Laurentia: I saye we,
bicause my brother and I are two twynnes. But seeing we are nowe
falsely accused unto thee, and by malicious surmised tales are
wrongefully brought in daunger of our lives: we intend to discover our
selves, ROMVLVS and to declare straunge things unto thee, whereof the
present perill we stande nowe in, shall plainely prove the trothe. Men
saye that we have bene begotten miraculously, fostered and geven sucke
more straungely, and in our tender yeres were fedd by birdes and wilde
beasts, to whom we were cast out as a praye. For a woulfe gave us
sucke with her teates, and an hitwaw (they saye) brought us litle
crommes, and put them in our mouthes, as we laye upon the bancke by
the river, where we were put in a troughe that at this daye remaineth
whole, bounde about with plates of copper, upon the which are some
letters engraven halfe worne out, which peradventure one daye will
serve for some tokens of knowledge (unprofitable for our parents) when
it shalbe to late, and after we are dead and gone. Numitor then
comparing these wordes, with the age the younge man seemed to be of,
and considering well his face: dyd not reject the hope of his
imagination that smiled on him, but handled the matter so, that he
found meanes to speake secretly with his daughter, notwithstanding at
that time she was kept very straightly. Faustulus in the meane time
hearing that Remus was prisoner, and that the King had delivered him
already into the hands of his brother Numitor to doe justice, went to
praye Romulus to helpe him, and tolde him then whose children they
were: for before he had never opened it to them but in darcke
speaches, and glawnsingwise, and so muche as sufficed to put them in
some hope. So Faustulus taking the troughe with him at that time, went
unto Numitor in great haste marveilously affrayed for the present
daunger he thought Remus in. The Kings souldiers which warded the
gates of the cittie, beganne to gather some suspicion of Faustulus
manner of comming: and he made him selfe to be the more suspected,
being questioned with about the cause of his repaire thither, that he
faltred in his wordes: besides, they espied his ROMVLVS troughe which
he caried under his cloke. Nowe amongest the warders, there was by
chaunce one that was the man to whom the children were committed to be
cast awaye, and was present when they were left on the bancke of the
river to the mercie of fortune. {Oedipus+} This man knewe the troughe
by & by, aswell by the facion, as by the letters graven upon it: who
mistrusted straight that which was true in deede. So he dyd not
neglect the thing, but went forthwith to the king to tell him the
matter, & led Faustulus with him to have him confesse the
trothe. Faustulus being in this perplexitie, could not kepe all close
upon examination, but dyd utter somewhat of the matter, & yet he tolde
not all. For he plainely justified the children were alive: yet he
sayed they were farre from the cittie of ALBA, where they kept beastes
in the fields. And as for the troughe, he was going to carye it to
Ilia, bicause she had divers times prayed him to let her see and feele
it: to the ende she might be the more assured of her hope, who
promised her that one daye she should see her children againe. So it
chaunced unto Amulius at that time, as it commonly dothe unto those
that are troubled, and doe any thing in feare or anger+, as a man
amazed thereat, to send one presently (who in all other things was a
very honest man, but a great friende of his brother Numitors) to aske
him if he had heard any thing that his daughters children were
alive. This persone being come to Numitors house, founde him ready to
embrace Remus, who fell to be witnes thereof, and of the good happe
discovered unto Numitor: whereupon he perswaded him howe to set upon
his brother, and to dispatche the matter with spede. So from that time
forwards, he tooke their parte. On thother side also the matter gave
them no leisure to deferre their enterprise, although they had bene
willing: for the whole case was somewhat blowen abroade. So Romulus
then got straight a power, and drewe very neere ROMVLVS the cittie,
and many of the citizens of ALBA went out to joyne with him, who
either feared or hated Amulius. Nowe Romulus power which he brought
(over and besides those citizens) was a good number of fighting men,
and they were divided by hundreds, and every hundred had his captaine
who marched before his bande, carying litle bundells of grasse or of
boughes tyed to the ende of their poles. The LATINES call these
bundels Manipulos, whereof it commeth that yet at this daye in an
armie of the Romaines, the souldiers which are all under one ensigne,
are called Manipulates. So Remus sturring up those that were within
the cittie, and Romulus bringing in men from without, the tyranne
Amulius fell in such feare and agonie, that without providing any
thing for his safety, they came upon him sodainly in his palace, and
slewe him. Thus you heare howe neere Fabius Pictor and Diocles
Peparethian doe agree in reciting the storie, who was the first in
mine opinion that wrote the foundation of the cittie of Rome: howbeit
there are that thincke they are all but fables and tales devised of
pleasure. But me thincks for all that, they are not altogether to be
rejected or discredited, if we will consider fortunes straunge effects
upon times, and of the greatnes also of the Romaine empire: which had
never atchieved to her present possessed power and authoritie, if the
goddes had not from the beginning bene workers of the same, and if
there had not also bene some straunge cause, and wonderful
foundation. Amulius being nowe slayne as before, and after that all
things were appeased, and reduced to good order againe: Remus and
Romulus would not dwell in the cittie of ALBA, being no lordes
thereof, nor also would be lords of it, so long as their grandfather
by the mothers side was alive. Wherefore after they had restored him
to his estate, and had done the honour and duety they ought unto their
mother: they purposed to goe and build a cittie in ROMVLVS those
places where they had bene first brought up, for this was the
honestest culler they could pretend for their departing from
ALBA. Peradventure they were enforced so to doe whether they would or
not, for the great number of banished men, and fugitive slaves which
were gathered together by them for their strength, who had bene
utterly lost and cast away, if they had bene once discharged by
them. Therfore it was of necessitie that they should dwell by them
selves, separated in some place, to kepe this number together and in
some order. For it is true that the inhabitants of the cittie of ALBA
would not suffer such banished persones & runnagates to be mingled
amongest them, nor would receave them into their cittie to be free
among them. All which appeareth sufficiently: first, bicause they
tooke awaye women by force: and so not of insolencie, but of
necessitie, when they founde no man that would bestow any of them. It
is manifest also they dyd greately honour and make much of the women
they had taken away before. Furthermore, when their cittie beganne a
litle to be setled, they made a temple of refuge for all fugitives and
afflicted persones, which they called the temple of the God
Asylaeus. Where there was sanctuarie and safety for all sortes of
people that repaired thither, and could get into the temple, for whom
it was alledged they could not deliver any bonde man to his mafter,
nor detter to his creditor, nor murtherer to the justice that was fled
thither for succor, bicause the oracle of Apollo the Delphian had
expressely enjoyned them to graunte sanctuary to all those that would
come thither for it. So by this meanes in shorte space their cittie
florished, and was repleanished, where at the first foundation of it,
they saye there was not above one thousand houses, as more at large
hereafter shalbe declared. When they came nowe to the building of
their cittie, Romulus and Remus the two brethern fell sodainely at a
strife together ROMVLVS about the place where the cittie should be
builded. For Romulus built ROME, which is called foure square, and
would needes it should remaine in the place which he had chosen. Remus
his brother chose another place very strong of situation, upon moumte
Aventine, which was called after his name Remonium, and nowe is called
Rignarium. Notwithstanding, in the ende they agreed betwene them
selves this controversie should be decided, by the flying of birds,
which doe geve a happy divination of things to come. So being sett in
divers places by them selves to make observation, some saye that there
appeared unto Remus sixe, and to Romulus twelve vulters. Other saye
that Remus truely sawe sixe, and Romulus feigned from the beginning
that he sawe twise as many: but when Remus came to him, then there
appeared twelve in deede unto Romulus, and this is the cause why the
Romaines at this daye in their divinations and soothesayings of the
flying of birds, doe marvelously observe the flying of the vulters. It
is true which the historiographer Herodotus Ponticus writeth: that
Hercules rejoyced much when there appeared a vulter to him, being
readie to beginne any enterprise. For it is the foule of the worlde
that dothe least hurte, and never marreth nor destroyeth any thing
that man dothe sowe, plante, or set: considering that she feedeth on
carion only, and dothe never hurte nor kill any living thing. Also she
dothe not praye upon dead fowle, for the likenes that is betwene them:
where the eagles, the dukes and the sakers doe murther, kill, and eate
those which are of their owne kynde. And yet as AEschylus sayeth,
Needes must that fowle are accompted be most vile, Most ravening, and
full of filthie minde, Which doth himself, continually defile, hy
praying still upon his propre kinde.  ROMVLVS Moreover, other birdes
are allwayes (as a man would saye) before our eyes, and doe daylie
shewe them selves unto us: where the vulter is a very rare byrde, and
hardely to be seene, and men doe not easely finde their ayeries. Which
hathe geven some occasion to holde a false opinion, that the vulters
are passagers, and come into these partes out of straunge
countryes. The prognosticators also thincke, that suche things which
are not ordinarie, and but seldome seene, be not naturall, but
miraculously sent by the goddes to prognosticate something. When Remus
knewe howe his brother had mocked him, he was very angry with him. And
when Romulus had cast a dytche, as it were for the wall about his
cittie, Remus dyd not only scorne it, but hindered also his worke, and
in the ende for a mockerie lept over his wall. To conclude, he dyd so
much, that at the last he was slayne there by Romulus owne handes as
some saye: or as other holde opinion, by the handes of one of his men
which was called Celer. In this fight they slewe Faustulus, and
Plistinus also his brother, who had holpen him to bring up
Romulus. Howsoever the matter fell out, this Celer absented him selfe
from ROME, and went into the countrye of THVSCANE. And they saye, that
men which are quicke, and readye upon a sodaine, tooke their names
ever after upon him, & were called Celeres. As amongest other, Quintus
Metellus, after the death of his father, having in very fewe dayes
made the people of ROME to see a combate of fensers (called
Gladiatores) {genl_reader+} fighting at the sharpe, they surnamed him
Celer, for that the Romaines marvelled howe he could prepare his
things in so shorte a time. Furthermore, Romulus having nowe buried
his brother, and his other two bringers up (called foster fathers) in
the place they call Remonia: beganne then to buyld and laye the
foundation of his cittie, sending for men out of THVSCANE, who did
name and teache him particularly all the ROMVLVS ceremonies he had to
observe there, according to their lawes and ordinances as a great holy
mysterie. And of all they made a rounde dytche in the place called a
this daye Comitium, into which they dyd cast their chiefest and best
things, which men use lawfully for good, & naturally as most
necessarie. After that they dyd throw also into it, a litle of the
earthe, from whence every man came, & mingled these all together. This
dytche in their ceremonies is called the worlde, in Latine Mundus,
even the selfe same name the Latines call the Universall. About this
dytche they dyd trace the compasse of the cittie they woulde buylde,
even as one would drawe a circle about a center. This done, the
founder of the cittie taketh a plough, to which he fastened a cutter
or ploughe share of brasse, and so yoked in the ploughe an oxe and a
cowe, he him selfe holding the ploughe dyd make rounde about the
compasse of the cittie a deepe furrowe. Those which followed him, had
the charge to throwe the turves of earthe inward into the cittie,
which the ploughe share raised up, and not to leave any of them turned
outward. The furrowe thus cast up was the whole compasse of their
walle, which they call in Latine Pomaerium, by shortning of the
syllables, for post murum: to wit, after wall. But in the place where
they determined to make a gate, they dyd take of the plougheshare and
drawe the ploughe, with leaving a certain space of earthe unbroken up:
whereupon the Romaines thincke all the compasse of their walles holy
and sacred, except their gates. For if their gates had bene hallowed
and sanctified, they would have had a conscience through them to have
brought in, or caried out of the cittie, any things necessarie for the
life of man, that had not bene pure and cleane. Nowe they beleeve
certainely, that this ceremonie of the foundation of their cittie was
made the one and twentie of Aprill: bicause the ROMAINES doe yet keepe
that daye holy daye, and call it ROMVLVS the feast of the nativitie of
their countrye. On which daye they dyd not in olde time sacrifice any
thing that had life, as esteeming that daye (which was the nativitie
of their cittie) to be most mete to be kept cleane and pure from being
polluted or defiled with any bloude. Notwithstanding before ROME was
buylded, they had another feast called the sheapeheards or heardmens
holy daye, which they dyd celebrate upon the same daye, and called it
Pallia. Nowe at this daye the beginnings of the moneths with the
ROMAINES is cleane contrarie to the GRECIANS: yet for all this, they
holde opinion for certaintie that the daye on which Romulus founded
his cittie, was assuredly that which the GRECIANS call Triacada: that
is to saye, the thirtie daye. On which there was seene an eclypse of
the moone, which they suppose was observed by the Poet Antimachus
(borne in the cittie of TEOS) in the thirtenth yere of the sixt
Olympiade. Likewise in the time of Marcus Varro (as a man learned, and
one that had redde as much of auncient stories as any ROMAINE) there
was a friend of his called Tarutius, a great philosopher and
mathematician. Who being geven to the calculation of astronomie for
the delight of speculation only, wherein he was thought most
excellent: it dyd fall out that Varro gave him this question, to
searche out what hower and daye the nativitie of Romulus was, who
gathered it out by certaine accidents, as they doe in the resolutions
of certaine geometrical questions. For they saye, that by the selfe
same science, one maye tell before of things to come, and to happen to
a man in his life, knowing certainely the hower of his nativitie: and
howe one maye tell also the hower of his nativitie, when by accidents
they knowe what hath happened to him all his life. Tarutius dyd the
question that Varro gave him. And having throughely considered the
adventures, dedes, and gestes of Romulus, ROMVLVS gathered and
conferred together, he dyd boldly judge for a certaintie, that he was
conceyved in his mothers wombe, in the first yere of the seconde
Olympiade, the three and twentie daye of the moneth which the
EGYPTIANS call Chaeac, and now is called December, about three of the
clocke in the morning, in which hower there was a whole eclypse of the
sunne: And that he was borne into the worlde, the one and twenteth of
the moneth of Thoth, which is the moneth of September, about the
rising of the sunne. And that ROME was begonne by him on the ninth
daye of the moneth which the EGYPTIANS call Pharmuthi and aunswereth
now to the moneth of Aprill, betweene two and three of the clocke in
the morning. For they will saye that a cittie hathe his revolution and
his time of continuaunce appointed, as well as the life of a man: and
that they knewe by the situation of the starres, the daye of her
beginning and foundation. These things and suche other like,
peradventure will please the readers better, for their straungenes and
curiositie, then offend or mislike them for their falsehood. Nowe
after he had founded his cittie, he first and foremost dyd divide in
two companies, all those that were of age to carie armour. In every
one of these companies there were three thousand footemen, and three
hundred horsemen: and they were called Legions, bicause they were
sorted of the chosen men that were pyckt out amongest all the rest for
to fight. The remaine after these was called Populus, which signifieth
the people. After this, he made a hundred counsellers of the best and
honestest men of the cittie, which he called Patricians: and the whole
company of them together he called Senatus, as one would saye, the
counsell of the auncients. So they were called Patricians, as some
will saye, the counsaill of the fathers lawfull children, which fewe
of the first inhabitants could shewe. It maye be, some will saye this
name was geven them of Patroci- ROMVLVS nium, as growing of the
protection they had by the sanctuarie of their cittie, which worde
they use at this daye in the selfe same signification: as one that
followed Evander into ITALIE, was called Patron, bicause he was
pitiefull, and relieved the poore and litle children, and so got him
selfe a name for his pitie and humanitie. But me thinckes it were more
like the trothe to saye, that Romulus dyd call them so, bicause he
thought the chiefest men should have a fatherly care of the meaner
sorte: {benevolence+} considering also it was to teache the meaner
sorte that they should not feare th'authoritie of the greater, nor
envie at their honours they had, but rather in all their causes should
use their favour and good will, by takng them as their
fathers. {service+} For even at this present, straungers call those of
the Senate, lordes or captaines: but the naturall ROMAINES call them,
Patres Conscripti which is a name of fatherhed and dignitie without
envie. It is true that at the beginning they were only called Patres,
but sithence, bicause they were many joyned unto the first, they have
bene named Patres Conscripti as a man should saye, fathers of recorde
together: which is the honorablest name he could have devised to make
a difference betwext the Senatours, and the people. Furthermore, he
made a difference betweene the chiefer cittizens, and the baser
people, by calling the better sorte Patroni as muche to saye, as
defenders: and the meaner sorte Clientes+, as you would saye,
followers, or men protected. This dyd breede a marvellous great love
and good will among them, making the one much beholding to the other,
by many mutuall curtesies and pleasures: {ring+} for the Patrons dyd
helpe the clients to their right, defended their causes in judgement,
dyd geve unto them counsaill, and dyd take all their matters in
hande. The clients againe enterchaungeably humbled them selves to
their patrons, not onely in outwarde honour & reverence towardes them,
but other- ROMVLVS wise dyd helpe them with money to marrie and
advaunce their daughters, or els to paye their dettes and credit, if
they were poore or decayed. There was no lawe nor magistrate that
could compell the patron to be a witnes against his client: nor yet
the client to witnesse against his patron. So they increased, and
continued, all other rights and offices of amitie and friendshippe+
together, saving afterwards they thought it a great shame and
reproache for the better, and richer, to take rewarde of the meaner
and poorer. And thus of this matter we have spoken
sufficiently. Moreover, foure moneths after the foundation of the
cittie was layed, Fabius writeth, there was a great ravishement of
women. There are some which laye it upon Romulus, who being then of
nature warlike, and geven to prophecies and aunswers of the goddes,
foretolde that his cittie should become very great and mightie, so as
he raysed it by warres, and increased it by armes: and he sought out
this culler to doe mischief, and to make warre upon the SABYNES. To
prove this true, some saye he caused certaine of their maydes by force
to be taken awaye, but not past thirtie in number, as one that rather
sought cause of warres, then dyd it for neede of mariages: which me
thinckes was not likely to be true, but rather I judge the
contrarie. For seeing his cittie was incontinently repleanished with
people of all sortes, whereof there were very fewe that had wives, and
that they were men gathered out of all countryes, and the most parte
of them poore and needye, so as their neighbours disdayned them much,
and dyd not looke they would longe dwell together: Romulus hoping by
this violent taking of their maydes and ravishing them, to have an
entrie into alliance with the SABYNES, and to entise them further to
joyne with them in mariage, if they dyd gentely intreate these wives
they had gotten, enterprised this violent taking of their maydes, &
ravishing of them ROMVLVS in suche a sorte. First he made it to be
commonly bruited abroade in every place, that he had founde the altar
of a god hidden in the grounde, and he called the name of the god,
Consus: either bicause he was a god of counsaill, wherupon the
ROMAINES at this daye in their tongue call Consilium, which we call
counsell: & the chief magistrates of their cittie Consules, as we saye
counsellers. Other saye it was the altar of the god Neptune, surnamed
the patron of horses. For this altar is yet at this daye within the
great listes of the cittie, and ever covered and hidden, but when they
use the running games of their horse race. Other saye bicause counsell
ever must be kept close and secret, they had good reason to kepe the
altar of this god Consus hidden in the grounde. Nowe other write when
it was opened, Romulus made a sacrifice of wonderful joye, and
afterwardes proclaimed it openly in divers places, that at suche a
daye there should be common playes in ROME, and a solemne feaft kept
of the god Consus, where all that were disposed to come should be
welcome. Great numbers of people repaired thither from all partes. He
him selfe was set in the chiefest seate of the showe place, apparelled
fayer in purple, & accompanied with the chiefe of his cittie about
him. And there having purposed this ravishement you have heard of, he
had geven the signe before: that the same should beginne, when he
should rise up and folde a playte of his gowne, and unfolde the same
againe. Hereupon his men stoode attending with their swordes: who so
sone as they perceyved the signe was geven, with their swordes drawen
in hande, and with great showtes and cryes ranne violently on the
maydes and daughters of the SABYNES to take them awaye and ravishe
them, and suffered the men to ronne awaye, without doing them any
hurte or violence. So some saye, there were but thirtie ravished,
after whose names were called the thirtie linages of the ROMVLVS
people of ROME. Howbeit Valerius Antias writeth, that there were five
hundred and seven and twentie: and Juba, sixe hundred foure score and
three. In the which is singularly to be noted for the commendation of
Romulus, that he him selfe dyd take then but onely one of the maydes
named Hersilia: that afterwardes was the only cause and mediation of
peace betwext the SABYNES and the ROMAINES. Which argueth plainely,
that it was not to do the SABYNES any hurte, nor to satisfie any
disordinate lust, that they had so forcibly undertaken this
ravishement: but to joyne two peoples together with the straightest
bondes that could be betweene men. This Hersilia as some saye, was
maried unto one Hostilias, the noblest man at that time amongest the
ROMAINES: or as others write, unto Romulus him selfe, which had two
children by her. The first was a daughter, and her name was Prima,
bicause she was the first: the other was a sonne, whom he named
Aollius, bicause of the multitude of people he had assembled together
in his cittie, and afterwardes he was surnamed Abillius. Thus
Zenodotus the TROEZENIAN writeth, wherein notwithstanding there be
divers that doe contrarie him. Among those which ravished then the
daughters of the SABYNES, it is sayed there were founde certaine meane
men caryini away, a marvellous passing fayer one. These met by chaunce
on the waye, certaine of the chief of the cittie, who would have taken
her by force from them, which they had done, but that they beganne to
crye they caried her unto Talassius, who was a younge man marveilously
well beloved of every bodye. Which when the others understoode, they
were exceeding glad, and they commended them: in so much as there were
some which sodainely turned backe againe, and dyd accompanie them for
Talassius sake, crying out a lowde, and often on his name. From whence
the custome came, which to this daye the ROMAINES synge at ROMVLVS
their mariages, Talassius, like as the GRECIANS synge Himeneus. For it
is sayed he was compted very happie that he met with this woman. But
Sextius Sylla a CARTHAGINIAN borne, a man very wise, and well learned,
tolde me once it was the crye and signe which Romulus gave to his men,
to beginne the ravishement: whereupon those which caried them awaye,
went crying this worde Talassius, and that from thence the custome
hathe continued, that they singe it yet at their mariages. Nevertheles
the most parte of authors, specially Juba, thinckes it is a warning to
remember the newe maried women of their worke, which is to spinne,
which the GRECIANS call Talassia, the Italian words at that time being
not mingled with the Greeke. And if it be true the ROMAINES used this
terme of Talassia, as we of GRECE doe use: we might by conjecture yeld
another reason for it, which should carie a better likelyhoode and
proofe. For when the SABYNES after the battel had made peace with the
ROMAINES, they put in an article in favour of the women in the
treatie, that they should not be bounde to serve their husbands in any
other worke, but in spinning of wolle. Ever since this custome hathe
growen, that those which geve their daughters in mariage, and those
who leade the bryde, and such as are present at the wedding, speake in
sporte to the newe maried wife, laughing, Talassius: in token that
they doe not leade the bryde for any other worke or service, but to
spinne wolle. Thereof this hathe bene the use to this daye, that the
bryde dothe not of her selfe come over the threshold+ of her husbands
dore, but she is hoysed pretely into the house: bicause the SABYNE
women at that time were so lift up, and caried away by force. They
saye also, that the manner of making the shed of the new wedded wives
heare, with the Iron head of a Javeling, came up then likewise: this
gtorie being a manifest token that these first mariages ROMVLVS were
made by force of armes, and as it were at the swords poynte: as we
have written more at large in the booke, wherein we tender and showe
the causes of the ROMAINES facions and customes. This ravishement was
put in execution about the eightenth daye of the moneth then called
Sextilis, and nowe named August: on which daye they yet celebrate the
feast they call Consalia. Nowe the SABYNES were good men of warre, and
had great numbers of people, but they dwelt in villages, and not
within inclosed walles: being a thing fit for their noble courages
that dyd feare nothing, and as those who were descended from the
LACEDAEMONIANS. Nevertheles, they seeing them selves bound and tyed to
peace by pledges and hostages, that were very neere allyed unto them,
& fearing their daughters should be ill entreated: sent ambassadours
to Romulus, by whom they made reasonable offers and persuasions, that
their daughters might be delivered unto them againe, without any force
or violence, and then afterwardes, that he would cause them to be
asked in mariage of their parents, as bothe reason and lawe would
require. To thend that with good will and consent of all parties, both
peoples might contract amitie and alliance together. Whereunto Romulus
made aunswer, he could not restore the maydes which his people had
taken awaye and maried: but most friendly he prayed the SABYNES to be
contented with their alliance. This aunswer being returned, and not
liked, whilest the princes and communaltie of the SABYNIES were
occupied in consultation, and about the arrming of them selves: Acron
king of the CENINENSES (a man exceeding courageous and skilfull in the
warres, and one that from the beginn'ng mistrusted the over bolde and
stowte enterprises that Romulus was likely to attempt, considering the
late ravishment of the SABYNES daughters, and howe he was alreadye
greatly dreaded of his neighbours, and som- ROMVLVS what untolerable,
if he were not chasticed and brought lower) first beganne to invade
him with a puissant armie, and to make hotte and violent warres upon
him. Romulus on th'other side prepared also, and went forth to meete
him. When they were come so neere together that they might see one
another, they sent defiance+ to eache other, and prayed that they two
might fight man to man amiddest their armies, and neither of theirs to
sturre a foote. Bothe of them accepted of it, and Romulus making his
prayer unto Jupiter, dyd promise, and made a vowe: that if he dyd geve
him the victorie to overcome, he would offer up to him the armour of
his enemie, which he dyd. For first he slew Acron in the field, and
afterwards gave battell to his men, and overthrew them also. Lastely
he tooke his cittie, where he did no hurte nor yet displeasure to any,
saving that he dyd commaunde them to pull downe their houses, and
destroy them, and to goe dwell with him at ROME: where they should
have the selfe same rightes and priviledges which the flrst
inhabitants did enjoye. There was nothing more enlarged the cittie of
ROME, then this manner of policie, to joyne allwayes unto it those she
had overcome and vanquished. Romulus now to discharge his vowe, and in
suche sorte that his offering might be acceptable to Jupiter, and
pleasaunt to his cittizens to beholde: did cut downe a goodly straight
growen young oke, which he lighted on by good fortune, in the place
where his campe did lye. The same he trimmed and dyd set forth after
the manner of victorie, hanging and tying all about it in fayer order,
the armour and weapons of king Acron. Then he girding his gowne to
him, and putting upon his long bushe of heare, a garland of lawrell,
layed the young oke upon his right shoulder, and he first marched
before towards his cittie, and songe a royall songe of victorie, all
his armie following him in armes unto the cittie in order of battell:
where his ROMVLVS cittizens receyved him in all passing wise and
triumphe. This noble and stately entrie ever since hath geven them
minds in such sorte, and in statelier wise to make their triumphe. The
offering of this triumphe was dedicated to Jupiter {non_nobis+}
surnamed Feretrian: bicause the Latine worde Ferire, signifieth to
hurt and kill: and the prayer Romulus had made, was, he might hurt and
kill his enemie. Such spoyles are called in Latine, Spolia opima:
therefore sayeth Varro, that opes signifie riches. Howbeit me thinckes
it were more likely to saye, that they were so named of this worde
Opus, which betokeneth a dede, bicause he must needes be the chief of
the armie, that hath slayne with his owne hands the generall of his
enemies, and that must offer the spoyles called Spolia opima, as you
would saye, his principal spoyles and dedes. This never happened yet
but to three Romaine captaines onely: of the which Romulus was the
first, who slew Acron, king of the CENINENSES. Cornelius Cossia was
the second, who killed Tolumnius, the generall of the TUSCANS. Clodius
Marcellus was the thirde, who slewe Britomartus, king of the GAVLES,
with his owne hands. And for the two last, Cossus and Marcellus, they
made their entrie into the cittie, carying their triumphes upon
charets triumphant: but Romulus dyd not so. Therefore in this poynt
Dionysius the historiographer hath erred, writing that Romulus dyd
enter into ROME upon a charter triumphant. For it was Tarquinius
Priscus the sonne of Demaratus, who first dyd set out triumphes in so
stately & magnificent showe. Other holde opinion it was Valerius
Publicola, who was the first that ever entred upon triumphant
charret. Concerning Romulus, his statues are yet to be seene in Rome,
carying his triumpe a foote. After this overthrows and and taking of
the CENINENSESS, the inhabitants of the citties of FIDENA,
CHRVSTUMERIVM, and ANTEFMNA, rose all together against the ROMAINES
whiles the other SABY- ROMVLVS NES also were a preparing them
selves. So they fought a battell, in which they tooke the overthrowe:
& left their citties to the spoyle of Romulus, their lands to be geven
where he thought good, and them selves to be caried to ROME. Romulus
then dyd geve their lands among his cittizens, except those lands
which did belong to the fathers of the maydens that they had taken
away and ravished. For he was contented that the fathers of them
should kepe still their lands. By and by other SABYNES stomaking
thereat, did chuse them a generall called Tatius, and so went with a
puysant army toward the cittie of ROME, whereunto to approche at that
time it was very harde, the castell or keepe of their cittie being
seated, where at this day the Capitoll standeth, within which there
was a great garrison, whereof Tarpeius was captaine, and not his
daughter Tarpeia, as some will saye, who set out Romulus as a
foole. But Tarpeia the captaines daughter, for the desire she had to
have all the golde bracelets which they dyd weare about their armes,
solde the forte to the SABYNES, and asked for reward of her treason,
all they did weare on their left armes. Tatius promised them unto her:
and she opened them a gate in the night, by the which she did let all
the SABYNES into the castell. Antigonus then was not alone who sayed,
he loved those which did betraye, and hated them that had betrayed:
nor yet Caesar Augustus who told Rymitalces the THRACIAN, that he
loved treason, but he hated traytors. And it is a comon affection
which we beare to wicked persons, whilest we stand in neede of them:
not unlike for all the world to those which have nede of the gall and
poyson of venemous beasts. For when they finde it, they are glad, and
take it to serve their turne: but after their turne is served, and
they have that they sought, they hate the crueltie of such beafts. So
played Tatius at that time. For when he was gotten into the castell,
he commanded the SABYNES (for performance of his promise he had made
to Tarpeia+) ROMVLVS they should not sticke to geve her all they weare
on their left armes, and to doe as he did: who taking from his owne
arme first, the bracelet which he ware, did cast it to her, and his
target after. And so did all the rest in like sorte, in so much as
being borne downe to the ground by the weight of bracelets and
targets, she dyed as pressed to deathe under her burden. Nevertheles
Tarpeius self was atteinted, and condemned also of treason, by Romulus
order, as Juba sayeth, it is set forth by Sulpitius Galba. They that
write nowe otherwise of Tarpeia, saying she was the daughter of Tatius
generall of the SABYNES, and was forced by Romulus to lie with him,
and how she was punished in this sorte by her own father after her
said treason committed: those I saye, amongest whom Antigonus is one,
are not to be credited. And the poet Simylus also dothe dote most, who
sayeth Tarpeia solde the Capitoll not to the SABYNES, but to the king
of GAULES, with whom she was in love: as in these verses dothe
appeare. Tarpeia, that mayde of foolishe mynde, which nere unto the
Capitoll did dwell (In fervent flames, of beastly love beblynde,
wherewith the king of Gaules did make her swell) Causd slately ROME
surprised for to be by enemies, as every man maye see. And so throughe
hope of his fidelitie betrayed her syre, with all his familie. And a
litle after, in speaking of the manner of her deathe, he sayeth also:
Yet lo: the Gaules, those worthie men of might threw her not downe,
into the waves of Po, But from their armes, wherewith they wonte to
fight they cast their shields upon her body so, That she surpresst
with such an heavy waight, (Ah woeful Mayde) to death was smoothred
straight.  ROMVLVS This mayden therefore being buried in the same
place, the whole hill was called afterwardes Tarpeius after her name,
which continued untill Tarquinius the King dyd dedicate all the place
to Jupiter: for then they caryed her bones into some other place, and
so it lost her name: Onles it be that rocke of the Capitoll, which at
this present time they call Rupes Tarpeia, from the toppe whereof they
were wonte in olde time to throwe downe hedlong all wicked
offenders. When the SABYNES now had gotten this holde, Romulus being
exceeding wrathe, sent them a defiaunce+, and bad them battell if they
durst. Tatius straight refused not, considering if by mischaunce they
were distressed, they had a sure refuge to retire unto. The place
betweene the two armies where the fight should be, was all round about
environned with litle hilles. So as it was playne, the fight could not
be but sharpe and daungerous, for the discommodiousnes of the place,
were was neither grounde for any to flye, nor yet any space for any
longe chase, it was of so small a compasse. Nowe it fortuned by
chaunce, the river of Tyber had overflowen the banckes a fewe dayes
before, and there remained in it a deeper mudde then men would have
judged, bicause the grounde was so plaine, and was even where the
great market place of ROME standeth at this daye. They could discerne
nothing thereof by the eye, bicause the upper parte of it was crusted,
whereby it was the more readye for them to venter upon, and the worse
to get out, for that it dyd syncke underneathe. So the SABYNES had
gone upon it, had not Curtius daunger bene, which by good fortune
stayed them. He was one of the noblest and valliantest men of the
SABYNES, who being mounted upon a courser, went on a good waye before
the armie. This courser entring upon the crustcd mudde and sincking
with all, beganne to plunge and struggle in the myer; whereat Curtius
proved ROMVLVS a while with the spurre to sturre him, and get him out,
but in the ende seeing it would not be, he left his backe, and saved
him selfe. The same very place to this daye is called after his name,
Lacus Curtius. The SABYNES then scaping thus this daunger, beganne the
battell. The fight dyd growe very cruell, and endured so a great
while, the victorie leaning no more to the one side then to the
other. There dyed in a small space a great number of men, amongest
whom Hostilius was one, who as they saye was the husband of Hersilia,
and grandfather to Hostilius that was king of ROMAINES after Numa
Pompilius. Afterwardes there were (as we maye thincke) many other
encounters and battels betweene them: howbeit they make mention of the
last above all the rest, wherein Romulus had so sore a blowe on his
head with a stone, that he was almost felled to the grounde, in so
much as he was driven to retire a litle out of the battell. Upon which
occasion the ROMAINES gave backe also, and drue towardes mount
Palatine, being driven out of the playne by force. Romulus begame nowe
to recover of the blowe he had receyved, and so returned to geve a
newe onset, and cryed out all he might to his souldiers to tarye, and
shewe their face againe to their enemie. But for all his lowde crying,
they left not flying still for life, and there was not one that durst
returne againe. Whereupon Romulus lyfting up his handes straight to
heaven, dyd most fervently praye unto Jupiter, that it would please
him to staye the flying of his people, and not suffer the ROMAINES
glorie thus to fall to their utter destruction, but to repaire it by
his favour againe. He had no soner ended this prayer, but divers of
his men that fled, beganne to be ashamed to flye before their King,
and a sodaine boldnes came upon them, and their feare therewithall
vanished awaye. The place they first stayed in was, where as nowe is
the temple of Jupitor Stator, which is as much to say, as Jupiter the
ROMVLVS stayer. Afterwardes gathering them selves together againe,
they repulsed the SABYNES even to the place they call nowe Regia and
unto the temple of the goddess Vesta: where bothe the battels being
prepared to geve a newe charge, there dyd fall out before them, a
straunge and an uncredible thing to see, which stayed them they fought
not. For of the SABYNE women whom the ROMAINES had ravished, some
ranne of the one side, other of the other side of the battels, with
lamentations, cryes and showtes, stepping betweene their weapons, and
among the slayne bodyes on the grounde, in suche sorte that they
seemed out of their wittes, and caried as it were with some
spirites. In this manner they went to finde out their fathers and
their husbands, some carying their sucking babes in their armes, other
having their heare lose about their eyes, and all of them calling,
nowe upon the SABYNES, nowe upon the ROMAINES, with the gentelest
names that could be devised: which dyd melt the hartes of bothe
parties in suche sorte, that they gave backe a litle, and made them
place betweene bothe the battells. Then were the cryes and
lamentations of everyone playneIy hearde. There was not a man there
but it pittied him, aswell to see them in that pittiefull case, as to
heare the lamentable wordes they spake: adding to their most humble
petitions and requestes that could be any waye imagined, passing wise
persuasions and reasons to induce them to a peace. For what offence
(sayed they) or what displeasure have we done to you, that we should
deserve suche an heape of evills, as we have already suffered, and yet
you make us beare? we were as you knowe violently (and against all
Iawe) ravished by those, whose nowe we remaine. But oure fathers, oure
brethern, oure mothers and friends have left us with them so long,
that processe of time, and the straightest bonds of the worlde, have
tyed us nowe so fast to them, whom mortally before we ROMVLVS hated:
that we are constrayned nowe to be slighted thus, to see them fight,
yea and to lament and dye with them, who before unjustly tooke us from
you. For then you came not to oure rescue when we were virgines
untouched, not to recover us from them when they wickedly assaulted
us; poore sowles: but nowe ye come to take the wives from their
husbands, and the mothers from their litle children. So as the helpe
ye thincke to geve us nowe dothe grieve us more, then the forsaking of
us was sorowfull to us then. Suche is the love they have borne unto
us, & suche is the kyndenes we beare againe to them. Nowe, if ye dyd
fight for any other cause then for us, yet were it reason ye should
let fall your armes for oure sakes (by whom you are made grandfathers
and fathers in lawe, cosins and brothers in lawe) even from those
against whom you now bend your force. But if all this warre beganne
for us, we hartely beseeche you then that you will receyve us with
your sonnes in lawe, and your sonnes by them, and that you will
restore unto us oure fathers, oure brethern, oure kinsefolkes and
friends, without spoyling us of oure husbands, of our children, and of
our joyes, and thereby make us woefull captives and prisoners in oure
mindes. These requestes and persuasions by Hersilia, and other the
SABYNE women being heard, bothe the armies stayed, and helde everie
bodie his hand, and straight the two generalles imparled
together. During which parle they brought their husbands and their
children, to their fathers and their brethern. They brought meate and
drincke for them that would eate. They dressed up the woundes of those
that were hurte. They caried them home with them to their houses. They
shewed them howe they were mistresses there with their husbands. They
made them see howe greately they were accompted of and esteemed: yea
howe with a wedlocke love and reputation they were honored. So in the
end ROMVLVS peace was concluded betwene them, wherein it was articled,
that the SABYNE women which would remaine with their husbands should
tarye still, and be exempted from all worke or service (as above
recited) save only spinning of wolle. And that the SABYNES and
ROMAINES should dwell together in the cittie, which should be called
ROMA, after Romulus name: and the inhabitants should be called
Quirites, after the name of the cittie of Tatius king of the SABYNES,
and that they should reigne and governe together by a comon
consent. The place where this peace was concluded, is called yet to
this daye Comitium: bicause that Coire, in the Latine tongue
signifieth to assemble. So the cittie being augmented by the one
halfe, they dyd choose of the SABYNES another hundred new PATRICIANS,
unto the first hundred of the ROMAINES that were chosen before. Then
were the Legions made of sixe thousand footemen, and six hundred
horsemen. After they divided their inhabitants into three Tribes,
wherof those that came of Romulus, were called Ramnenses after his
name: those that came of Tatius were called Tatienses after his name:
and those that were of the third stocke, were called Lucerenses, as
from the Latine word Lucus, called with us a grove in English, because
thither great number of people of all sortes dyd gather, which
afterwards were made citizens of ROME. The very worde of Tribus (which
signifieth hands, wards, or hundreds) do the witnesse this beginning
of ROME from wards, or hundreds. For hereupon the ROMAINES call those
at this daye, their Tribunes, which are the chiefe heades of the
people. But every one of these principall wardes had afterwards ten
other particular wards under them, which some thincke were called
after the names of the thirtie SABYNE women that were ravished: but
that semeth false, bicause many of them cary the names of the places
they came from. Howbeit at that time many things were stab-- ROMVLVS
lished and ordeined in honour_of_women+: as to geve them place, the
upper hande in meeting them, the upper hand in streets: to speake no
fowle or dishonest word before them, no man to unraye himselfe, or
shew naked before them: that they should not be called before
criminall judges sitting upon homicides & murderers: that their
children should weare about their necks a kind of a juell called
Bulla, facioned in manner like these water bubbles that rise upon the
water when it beginneth to raine: and that their gownes should be
garded with purple. Now the two Kings dyd not straight conferre
together so sone as any occasion of busines was offered them, but
either of them dyd first counsell alone with his hundred Senatours,
and afterwards they dyd all assemble together. Tatius dwelt in the
place where nowe is the temple of Juno Moneta+: Romulus in the place
called at this present, the stayers of the fayer bancke, then the
descent of mount Palatine, as they goe to the showe place or great
listes, where they saye was somtime the holy cornell tree whereof they
make so great accompt. Romulus one daye desirous to prove his
strength, threwe (as it is sayed) a darte from mount Aventine toward
mount Palatine. The staffe whereof was of a cornell tree: and the Iron
of it entred so deepe into the ground being a lustye fatte soyle, that
no man could pull it out, although many proved it, and did the best
they could. The ground being very good and fit to bring forth trees,
did so nourishe the ende of this staffe, that it tooke roote, and
beganne to spread braunches: so that in time it became a fayer great
cornell tree, which the successours of Romulus dyd inclose with a
walle, and dyd kepe and worshippe it as a very holy thing. If by
chaunce any went to see it, and found it looked not freshe and grene,
but like a tree withered and dryed awaye for lacke of moysture: he
went awaye straight as one affrayed, crying to all he met (and they
ROMVLVS with him went crying still) in every place, water, water, as
it had bene to have quenched a fyre. Then ranne they thither out of
all quarters with vessels of water, to water and moyste the tree. In
the time of Caius Caesar, who caused the stayers about it to be
repayred: they saye the labourers raysing the place, and digging about
this cornell tree, dyd by negligence hurte the rootes of the same in
suche sorte, as afterwardes it dryed up altogether. Nowe the SABYNES
receyved the moneths after the manner of the Romaines, whereof we have
written sufficiently in the life of Numa. Romulus againe used the
SABYNES sheldes: and both he and his people chaunged the facion of
their armour and weapons they used. For the ROMAINE,S before dyd carye
litle shelds like the ARGIVES. As for either of their holy dayes and
sacrifices, they kept them bothe together, and dyd not take awaye any
of them, which either the one or the other people observed before, but
they added thereunto some other newe. As that which they call
Matronalia, which was instituted in honour of the women, bicause by
their meanes peace was concluded. And that also of Carmentalia in the
honour of Carmenta, whom some suppose to be the goddesse of fate or
destinie+, bicause she hathe rule and power over the nativities of
men, by reason whereof, the mothers call upon her often, and reverence
her very much. Other saye she was the wife of Evander the Arcadian,
who being a prophetesse inspired by the god Phoebus, gave the oracles
in verse, wherupon she was surnamed Carmenus, bicause that Carmina in
Latine signifie verses: for it is of certaintie that her proper name
was Nicostrata. Howbeit there are some which geve another manner of
derivation and interpretation of this worde Carmenta, which is the
liklier to be true: as if they would saye, Carens mente: which
signifieth wanting wit, for the very furie that taketh them when they
are inspired ROMVLVS with the propheticall spirite. For in Latine
Carere, betokeneth to lacke: and Mens, signifieth wit. As for the
feast of Palilia, we have tolde of it before: but the feast of
Lupercalia, considering the time of celebrating thereof, it seemeth it
is ordeined for a purification. For it is celebrated on the
unfortunate dayes of the moneth of Februarie, which are called the
purging dayes. The dayes in the olde time on which they did celebrate
the same, were called Februata. But the proper name of the feast, is
as much to saye, as the feast of woulves. Wherefore it seemeth to be a
feast of great antiquitie, and instituted by the ARCADIANS which came
in with Evander: albeit the name of woulves is as comon to the
females, as the males, and so it might perhappes be called, by reason
of the woulfe that brought up Romulus. For we see those which ronne up
and down the cittie that daye, and they call Luperci, doe beginne
their course in the very place where they saye Romulus was cast
out. Howbeit many things are done, whereof the originall cause were
hard now to be conjectured. For goates about a certaine time of the
yere are killed, then they bring two young boyes, noble mens sonnes,
whose foreheads they touch with the knife be bloudied with the bloude
of the goates that are sacrificed. By and by they drye their forheads
with wolle dipped in milke. Then the yong boyes must laughe
immediately after they have dried their forheads. That done they cut
the goates skinnes, and make thongs of them, which they take in their
hands, and ronne with them all about the cittie starck naked (saving
they have a clothe before their secrets) and so they strike with these
thonges all they mete in their waye. The yonge wives doe never shonne
them at all, but are well contented to be striken with them, beleeving
it helpeth them to be with childe, and also to be easely
delivered. There is another thing yet in this feast, that these
LVPERCIANS which ronne about the ROMVLVS cittie, doe also sacrifice a
dogge. Concerning this feast, the Poet named Butas dothe write
somewhat in his elegies, where shewing the occasion of the fond
customes and ceremonies of the Romaines, he dothe saye that Romulus
after he had slayne Amulius, did runne straight with great joye to the
very place where the wolfe gave him and his brother sucke, in memory
of which running, he sayeth this feast of Lupercalia was celebrated
and that the noble mens younger sonnes doe runne through the cittie,
striking and laying on them which they meete in their way with their
goate thongs, in token that Remus and Romulus ranne from ALBA unto
that place with their drawen swordes in their hands. And that the
touching of their forehead with a bloudy knife, is in remembrance of
the daunger they stoode in at that time to have bene slaine. Last of
all, the drying of their foreheads with wolle dipped in milke, is in
memorie of the milke they sucked of the woulfes. But Caius Acilius
writeth, that Remus and Romulus before Rome was built, did happen to
lose their bcasts on a daye, and after they had made certaine prayers
unto Faunus for the finding of them, they ranne here and there starcke
naked as they went a seeking of them, for feare they should have bene
troubled with overmuch heate and sweating. And this is the cause he
sayeth, why the LUPERCIANS doe at this daye ronne about naked. And if
it be true they make this sacrifice for a purging, a man might saye
they might offer up a dogge for that purpose, like as the Graecians in
their sacrifices of purgation doe use to carie out all their
doggs. And in many places they doe observe this ceremonie, to drive
out the doggs, which they call Periscylacismes. Otherwise, if it be of
a thanckfullnes to the woulfe that gave Romulusm sucke, and saved him
from perishing, that the Romaines doe solemnise this feast: it is not
impertinent they sacrifice a dogge, bicause he is enemie to the
woulves. Onles a man ROMVLVS would saye it was to punishe this beast,
which troubleth & letteth the LVPERCIANS when they runne. Some saye
also it was Romulus, who first instituted it a religion to kepe holy
fire, & that first ordeined holie virgines, which are called Vestales:
other doe ascribe it to Numa Pompilius. Notwithstanding it is most
certaine otherwise, that Romulus was a very devoute man, and greatly
skilfull in telling of things to come by the flying of birds: for
which cause he did ordinarilie carie the augurs crooked staffe, called
in Latin Lituus. It is a rodde crooked at the end, wherewith the
augurs or soothsayers when they sit down to behold the flying of
birds, doe poynte out and marke the quarters of the heaven. They
carefully kept it within the pallace: howbeit it was lost in the time
of warres with the GAVLES, when the cittie of ROME was
taken. Afterwards when these barbarous people were chased and driven
out, it was founde againe (as it is sayed) all whole, within a great
hill or heape of ashes, having no manner of hurte, where all things
els about it had bene consumed and marred with the fire. He is sayd to
have made certaine lawes among which there is one that seemeth
somewhat harde, which is: that the man is suffered to put awaye his
wife, and in some case to geve her nothing: and like libertie is not
geven to the wife to put awaye her husband. As if she maye be proved
to have consented to the poysoning of her children, or to have
counterfeited her husbands keyes, or to have committed adulterie. But
if he put her awaye for any other cause, then the one halfe of the
goodes is adjudged to the wife, and the other moytie to the goddesse
Ceres: and he that putteth away his wife after this sorte, is
commanded further, to sacrifice to the goddes of the earth. This also
was notable in Romulus, who having ordeined no payne nor punishement
for parricides (that is for those that kill their parents) called yet
all murder parricide, to shewe how detestable ROMVLVS that murder was,
and as for parricides, he thought it unpossible. And it seemed a great
while, he had reason to thincke so, that such wickednes would never
happen in the worlde. For in sixe hundred yeres together it was not
knowen that any man in ROME committed suche an offence: and the first
parricide with them was Lucius Ostius, after the warres of
Hanniball. But enough touching this matter. Furthermore in the first
yere of the reigne of Tatius, some of his kynsemen and friendes met by
chaunce on the waye certeine ambassadours, comming from the citie of
LAVRENTVM unto ROME, whom they set upon, and ment to have robbed
them. The ambassadours resisting them, and not willing to deliver
their money, they made no more a doe, but slewe them. This haynous
deede being thus committed, Romulus was of opinion they shoulde be
executed openly in the highe waye for example. But Tatius deferred it
still from daye to daye, and dyd allwayes excuse the matter unto him,
which was the only cause, they fell out one with the other. For in all
things els, they caried them selves as honestly as might be the one to
the other, ruling and governing together, with a common consent and
good accorde. But the parents & kynsefolkes of those who were
murdered, when they sawe they could have no justice bicause of Tatius:
watched him one daye as he sacrificed with Romulus, in the cittie of
Lavinium, and stabbed him in, without offering Romulus any violence,
but rather praysed him for a good and righteous prince. Romulus caused
the bodye of Tatius to be straight taken up and buried him very
honorably in mount Aventine, about the place nowe called
Armilustrium. Further he never shewed any countenaunce to revenge his
death. There are some Historiographers that write, that those of the
cittie of Laurentum being afeard at this murder, dyd deliver forthwith
to Romulus the murderers of the ambassadours. He notwithstanding
ROMVLVS dyd let them goe againe, saying: one murder was requited by
another. This gave some occasion of speache to thincke, he was glad he
was rydde of his companion: yet the Sabynes neither sturred nor
rebelled for all this, but some of them were affrayed of him for the
great love {love_fear+} they bare him, other for his power he was of,
and other for the honour they gave him as a god, continuing still in
duetie and obedience towards him. Divers straungers also had Romulus
valiancie in great honour: as amongest other, those who then were
called the auncient Latines, which sent ambassadours to him to make
league and amitie with him. He devised to take the cittie of Fidena
which was nere ncighbour to Rome. Some saye he tooke it upon a
sodaine, having sent before certen horse men to breake downe the
hookes & hingewes with force, which the gates hang by: and him self
came after with the rest of his armie, and stale upon them, before the
cittie mistrusted any thing. Other write that the Fidenates first
invaded his countrye, and foraged unto the very suburbes of Rome,
where they did great harme: and howe Romulus layed an ambushe in their
waye as they returned home, and slewe a great number of them. When he
tooke their cittie, he did not rase it, but made a colonye of it, (as
a place to send the over increase of Rome unto) whether he sent
afterwards two thousand five hundred Romains to inhabite there: and it
was on the thirtenth daye of Aprill, which the Romaines call the Ides
of the same moneth. Not long after there rose suche a great plague+ in
Rome, that men died sodainely, and were not sicke: the earth brought
forth no fruite: bruite beasts delivered no increase of their kynde:
there rayned also droppes of bloude in Rome, as they saye. In so much
as besides the evills men felt in this extremitie, they fell in a
marvellous feare of the wrathe of the goddes. Afterwards perceiving
the like happened to the inhabitants of Laurentum, then ev- ROMVLVS
ery man judged it was the very vengeance & heavie hand of the goddes,
who plagued and punished these two citties for the murder committed
upon Tatius, and the ambassadours that were killed. Whereupon the
murderers of both sides were apprehended, and executed: and these
plagues+ by and by ceased both in the one and in the other
cittie. Romulus besides, did purifie the cities with certaine
sacrifices that he devised, which they keepe still at this daye, at
the gate called Ferentina. But before the plague ceased, the Camerines
came to assaulte the Romaines, & had overcomen all the countries
supposing they should not be able to withstand them, bicause they had
bene so sore troubled with the plague+. Yet notwithstanding, Romulus
set upon them with his army, and wanne the field of them, in which
conflict there were slaine about sixe thousand men. After the battell
done, he tooke their cittie, and conveyed to Rome the one half of the
inhabitans that remained. After this, he sent twise as many Romaines
as there were naturall Camerians left at Camerine, to dwell there
among them. This was done the first daye of August: so great was the
multitude of the inhabitants of Rome that had increased in sixteene
yeres from the first foundation of the cittie. Emong other spoyles he
got there, he caried away a charret of brasse with foure horses which
he caused to be set up in the temple of Vulcan, and his owne statue
upon it, and victorie crowning him with a garland triumphant. His
power being growen thus great, his weake neighbours did submit
themselves unto him, being contented to live in peace by him. His
stronger neighbours were affrayed of him, and envied much his
greatness and dyd take it no good policie to suffer him thus to rise
in the face of the world, and thought it meete spedilie to dawnte his
glorie, and clippe his winges. The first of the Thuscans that bent
their power against him were the Veians, who had a great countrie, and
dwelled ROMVLVS in a stronge & mightie cittie. To picke a quarrell to
him, they sent to have redelivered to them the cittie of FIDENA, which
they sayed belonged unto them. This was thought not only unreasonable,
but a thing worthy laughing at considering that all the while the
FIDENATES were in warre, and daunger, the THVSCANS never came to their
ayde, but had suffered them to be slayne, and then came to demaunde
their lands and tenements, when other had possession of
them. Therefore Romulus having geven them an aunswer full of mockerie,
and derision, {defiance+} they divided their power into two armies,
and sent the one against them of FIDENA, and with the other they
marched towards ROME. That which went against the cittie of FIDENA,
prevayled, and killed there two thousand ROMAINES: the other was
overthrowen and discomfited by Romulus, in which there dyed eight
thousand VEIANS. Afterwards, they met againe somewhat neere the cittie
of the FIDENATES, where they fought a battell: and all dyd confesse,
the chiefest exployte was done by Romulus owne hands that daye, who
shewed all the skill and valliantnes+ that was to be looked for in a
worthy captaine. It seemed that daye, he farre exc&eded the common
sorte of men, in strength of bodye & feates of armes. Nevertheles that
which some saye, is hardely to be credited: & to be plaine, is out of
all compasse of beliefe and possibilities. For they write, there were
fourteene thousand men slayne at that battell, and that more then
halfe of them were slayne by Romulus own hands: and the rather, for
that every man judgeth it a vaine bragge and ostentation which the
MESSENIANS reporte of Aristomenes, who offered in sacrifice to the
goddes three hundred beastes of victorie, as for so many
LACEDAEMONIANS him self had slayne in the battell. Their armie being
thus broken, Romulus suffered them to flye who by swiftnes could save
them selves, and marched with all his power in good arraye towards
their cittie.  ROMVLVS The cittizens then considering their late great
losse and overthrows, would not hazard the daunger of withstanding
him, but went out all together, and made their humble petition and
sute for peace. All was graunted them for a hundred yeres, save they
should forgoe their territorie called Sestemagium, that was the
seventh parte of their countrye: and yeld to the ROMAINES all their
salt houses by the rivers side, and deliver fiftie of their chiefest
cittizens for their pledges. Romulus made his entrie and triumphe into
ROME for them, the daye of the Ides of October, which is the fitenth
daye of the same moneth, leading in his triumphe many prisoners taken
in those warres: and among other, the generall of the VEIANS, a very
auncient man who fondly behaved him selfe in his charge, and shewed by
his doings, that his experience was farre shorte for his yeres in the
warres. And from thence it commeth, when they offer to the goddes to
geve thanckes for this victorie, {non_nobis+} that even at daye, they
bring to the capitoll throughe the market place an old man apparelled
in a purple robe, and with a Juell called Bulla about his necke, which
the gentlemens young children weare about their neckes: and a heraulde
goeth harde by hiln, crying, who buyeth who, the SARDIANIANS, bicause
they holde opinion the THVSCANS come of the SARDIANIANS, and the very
cittie of VEIES standeth in the countrie of THVSCANIE. This was the
laste warre that Romulus had offered him: after which he could not
beware of that which is wonte to happen almost to all those, who by
sodaine prosperitie, and fortunes+ speciall favour, are raised to
highe and great estate. For trusting to prosperitie and good successe
of his actes, beganne to growe more straunge and stately, and to carie
a sowerer countenaunce then he was wonte to doe efore: leaving to be
after his olde manner, a curteous and gracious prince, and gave him
selfe in facions to be ROMVLVS somwhat like a tyrant, both for his
apparell, and stately porte & majestie that he caried. For he ware
ever a coate of purple in graine, and upon that, a longe robe of
purple culler: and gave audience, sitting in a wyde chayer of estate
having ever about him young men called Celeres, as we would say,
flights, for their swiftnes and speede in executing his
commaundements. Other there were that went before him, who caried as
it were tipstaves in their hands, to make the people geve roome, and
had leather thongs about their middle to binde fast streight, all the
prince should conimaunde. Nowe in olde time the Latines sayed, Ligare
was to binde: but, at this present they saye Alligare, from whence it
commeth that the ushers and sergeants are called Lictores. Howbeit me
thincks it were more likely to saye, they had put to a.c. and that
before they were called Litores, without a.c. For they be the very
same which the GRECIANS call Liturgos, and be in Englishe, ministers
or officers: and at this daye, Leitos, or Leos, in the GREKE tongue
signifieth the people. Romulus now after his grandfather Numitor was
dead at the cittie of ALBA, and that the Realme by inheritance fell to
him: to winne the favour of the people there, turned the Kingdome to a
Comon weale, and every yere dyd chuse a newe magistrate to minister
justice to the SABYNES. This president taught the noble men of ROME to
seeke and desire to have a free estate, where no subject should be at
the commaundement of a King alone, and where every man should commaund
and obey as should be his course. Those which were called patricians
in ROME, dyd medle with nothing, but had onely an honorable name and
robe, and were called to counsail rather for a facion, then to have
their advise or counsaile. For when they were assembled together, they
dyd onely heare the Kings pleasure & commaundement, but they might not
speake one word, and so departed: having no other prehemi- ROMVLVS
nence over the Common wealthe, saving they were the first that dyd
knowe what was done. All other things thereby dyd greve them
lesse. But when of his owne mere authoritie, and as it were of him
self, he would as pleased him, bestowe the conquered lands of his
enemies to his souldiers, and restore againe to the VEIANS their
hostages {Hal+} as he dyd: therein plainely appeared, how great
injurie he dyd to the Senate. Whereupon the Senatours were suspected
afterwards that they killed him, when within fewe dayes after it was
sayed, he vanished awaye so straungely, that no man ever knewe what
became of him. This was on the seventh daye of the moneth nowe called
July, which then was named Quintilis, leaving no manner of certaintie
els of his deathe that is knowen, save only of the daye and the time
when he vanished, as we have sayed before. For on that daye, the
ROMAINES doe at this present many things, in remembrance of the
misfortune which happened to them then. It is no marvell, the
certaintie of his deathe was not knowen: seeing Scipio Africanus was
founde after supper dead in his house, and no man could tell, nor yet
dyd know how he dyed. For some saye that he fainted, and dyed
sodainely being of weake complexion. Other saye he poysoned him
self. Other thincke his enemies dyd get secretly in the night into his
house, and smoothred him in his bed. Yet they founde his body layed on
the ground, that every body might at leysure consider, if they could
finde or conjecture the manner of his death. Howbeit Romulus vanished
away sodainely, there was neither seene pece of his garments, nor yet
was there found any parte of his body. Therefore some have thought
that the whole Senatours fell upon him together in the temple of
Vulcan, and how after they had cut him in peces, every one caried
awaye a pece of him, folded close in the skyrte of his robe. Other
thincke also, this vanishing away was not in the tem- ROMVLVS ple of
Vulcan, nor in the presence of the Senatours only but they saye that
Romulus was at that time without the cittie, neere the place called
the goates marshe, where he made an oration to the people, & that
sodainely the weather chaunged, and overcast so terribly, as it is not
to be tolde nor credited. For first, the sunne was darckned as if it
had bene very night: this darcknes was not in a calme or still, but
there fell horrible thunders, boysterous windes, and flashing
lightnings on every side, which made the people ronne awaye, and
scatter here and there, but the Senatours kept still close
together. Afterwardes when the lightning was past and gone, the daye
cleared up, and the element waxed fayer as before. Then the people
gathered together againe, and sought for the King: asking what was
become of him. But the noble men would not suffer them to enquire any
further after him, but counselled them to honour and reverence him as
one taken up into heaven: and that thenceforth insteade of a good
king, he would be unto them a mercifull & gratious god. The meaner
sorte of people (for the most parte of them) tooke it well, and were
very glad to heare thereof: and went their waye worshipping Romulus in
theit hartes with good hope they should prosper by him. Howbeit some
seeking out the trothe more egerly did comber sore, and troubled the
Patricians: accusing them, that they abused the common people with
vaine & fonde persuasions, whilest them selves in the meane time had
murdered the King with their owne hands. While things were thus in
burly burly, some saye there was one Julius Proculas, the noblest of
all the Patricians, being esteemed for a marvelous honest man, and
knowen to have bene very familier with Romulus, & came with him from
the cittie of ALBA: that stepped forth before all the people, and
affirmed (by the greatest and holyest othes a man might sweare) that
he had met Romulus on the waye, farre greater and fayerer, ROMVLVS
then he had seene him ever before, and armed all in white armour,
shyning bright like fire: whereat being afrayed in that sorte to see
him, he asked him yet: O King, why hast thou thus left and forsaken
us, that are so falsely accused and charged to our utter discredit and
shame, by thy vanishing. To whom Romulus gave this aunswer. Proculus,
it hathe pleased the goddes from whom I came, that I should remaine
amongest men so long as I dyd: and nowe having built a cittie, which
in glorie and greatnes of empire shalbe the chiefest of the worlde,
that I should returne againe to dwell with them, as before, in
heaven. Therefore be of good comforte, {Jesus+} and tell the ROMAINES,
that they exercising prowesse and temperancie+, shalbe the mightiest
and greatest people of the worlde. As for me, tell them I will
henceforth be their god, protectour and patron, & they shall call me
Quirinus. These wordes seemed credible to the ROMAINES, aswell for the
honesty of the man that spake them, as for the solemne othes he made
before them all. Yet I wote not how, some celestiall motion, or divine
inspiration helped it much: for no man sayed a word against it. And so
all suspition and accusation layed aside, every man began to call upon
Quirinus, to praye unto him, & to worshippe him. Truely this tale is
much like the tales that the GRECIANS tell of Aristeas the
proconnesian, and of Cleomedes the Astypalaeian. For they saye, that
Aristeas dyed in a fullers worke house, and his friends comming to
carte awaye his bodye, it fell out they could not tell what became of
it: and at that instant there were some which came out of the fields,
and affirmed they met and spake with him, and how he kept his waye
towards the cittie of CROTONA. It is sayed also that Cleomedes was
more then a man naturally strong and great, and therewithall madde,
and furious hastie. For after many desperate partes he had played, he
came at the last on a daye into a schoole house full ROMVLVS of litle
children, the roofe wherof was borne with one piller, which he dyd hit
with so terrible a blowe of his fiste, that he brake it in the
middest, so as the whole roofe fell and dashed the poore children in
peces. {Samson+} The people ranne straight after him to take him. But
he threwe him selfe forthwith into a chest, and pulled the lyd upon
him. He helde it so fast downe, that many striving together all they
could to open it, they were not able once to styrre it. Whereupon they
brake the chest all in peces, but they founde the man neither quicke
nor dead. Whereat they were marveilously amazed, and sent to Apollo
Pythias, where the prophetesse aunswered them in this verse: Cleomedes
the last of the demygoddes. The reporte goeth also that Alcmenes corse
dyd vanyshe awaye, as they caried it to buriall, and howe in steade
thereof they founde a stone layed in the beere. To conclude, men tell
many other suche wonders, that are farre from any apparance of trothe:
only bicause they would make men to be as goddes, and equall with them
in power. {presumption+} It is true, that as to reprove and denie
divine power, it were a lewde and wicked parte: even so to compare
earthe and heaven together, it were a mere follie. Therefore we must
let suche fables goe, being most certaine that as Pindarus sayeth it
is true. Eche living corps, must yelde at last to deaths, and every
life must leese his vitall breathe: The soule of man, that onely lives
on hie, and is an image of eternitie. For from heaven it came, and
thither againe it dothe returne, {wdswth+} not with the bodye, but
then soonest, when the sowle is furthest of and separated from the
bodye, and that she is kept holy, & is no more defiled with the
flesh. It is that the philosopher Heraclitus ment, when he sayed.
ROMVLVS The drye light, is the best soule which flyeth out of the
bodye, as lightning dothe out of the clowde: but that which is joyned
with the bodye being full of corporall passions, is a grosse vapour,
darke and massie, and cannot flame, ryse or shoote out like
lightning. {natural_depravity+} We must not beleeve therefore, that
the bodyes of noble and vertuous men, doe goe up together with their
soules into heaven, against the order of nature. But this we are
certainely to beleeve, that by the vertues of their soules (according
to divine nature & justice) they doe of men become saincts, and of
saincts halfe goddes, and of halfe goddes, entier & perfect goddes:
after that they are perfectly (as it were by sacrifices of purgation)
made cleane and pure, being delivered from all paine and mortalide,
and not by any civill ordinance, but in trothe and reason, they
receave a most bappie and glorious ende. {purgatory+} Now touching
Romulus surname, which afterwards was called Quirinus: some saye that
it signifieth as much as warlike: other thinke he was so called
bicause the ROMAINES them selves were called Quirites. Other write,
that men in old time did call the poynte of a speare, on the darte it
self, Quiris: by reason whereof the image of Juno surnamed Quiritides,
was set up with an iron speare, and the speare which was consecrated
in the Kings pallace, was called Mars. Furthermore it is an use
amongest men, to honour them with a speare or darte, which have shewed
them selves valiant in the warres: and that for this cause Romulus was
surnamed Quirinus, as who would saye, god of the speares and
warres. There was since built a temple unto him, in the hill called
Quirinus, and so named of him. The daye whereon he vanished, is called
the flying of the people, or otherwise the Nones of the goates. For on
that daye, they goe out of the cittie to doe sacrifice in the place
called the Fenne, or the goates marshe: and the ROMAINES call a goate,
Capra. As they goe thus together, they call, ROMVLVS with lowde
showtes and cryes upon divers Romaines names, as Ilfarcus, Cneus, and
Gaius, in token of the flying that was then: and that they called one
another backe againe, as they ranne awaye in great feare and
disorder. Howbeit other saye, that it is not done to shewe the ronning
awaye, but to shewe their spede and diligence, and referre it to the
storie. Nowe after the GAVLES that had taken ROME were expulsed by
Camillus, the cittie was so weakned, that they could scante recover
their force and strength againe: wherfore many of the LATINES joyning
together, went with a great mightie armie, under the conducte of
Livius Postbumius, to warre against the ROMAINES. This Posthumius
brought his campe as neere the cittie of ROME as he could, and sent to
the ROMAINES by a trumpet to let them understand, how the LATINES were
desirous by newe mariages, to restore their olde auncient amitie and
kinred that was neere hand decayed betweene them: and therefore if the
ROMAINES would send them a convenient number of their daughters and
young widowes to marie with them, they should have peace, as they had
before time with the SABYNES upon the like occasion. The ROMAINES
hereat were sore troubled, thincking that to deliver their women in
such sorte was no better, then to yelde and submit them selves to
their enemies. But as they were thus perplexed, a wayting mayde called
Philotis (or as other call her, Tutola) gave them counsell to doe
neither the one not the other, but to use a pollicy with them, by
meanes whereof they should scape the daunger of the warres, and should
also not be tyed nor bounde by any pledges. The devise was, they
should send to the LATINES her selfe, & a certaine number of their
fayrest bonde maydes, trimmed up like gentlewomen and the best
cittizens daughters, and that in the night she would lifte them up a
burning torche in the ayer, at which signe they should come armed, and
set up- ROMVLVS on their enemies as they laye a sleepe. This was
brought to passe: & the LATINES thought verely they had bene the
ROMAINES daughters. Philotis fayled not in the night to lfte up her
signe, & to shewe them a burning torche in the toppe of a wilde figge
tree: and dyd hange certaine coverlets & clothes behinde it, that the
enemies might not see the light, and the ROMAINES contrariwise might
decerne it the better. Thereupon so sone as the ROMAINES sawe it, they
ranne with all spede, calling one another by their names, and issued
out of the gates of the cittie with great haste: and so tooke their
enemies upon a sodaine, and slewe them. In memorie of which victorie,
they doe yet solemnise the feaste called the Nones of the goates,
bicause of the wilde figge tree called in Latine Caprificus. And they
doe feast the women without the cittie, under shadowes made of the
boughe of figge trees. The wayting maydes, they ronne up and downe and
playe here and there together. Afterwards they seeme to fight, and
throwe stones one at another, as then they dyd when they holpe the
ROMAINES in their fight. But fewe writers doe avowe this tale, bicause
it is on the daye time that they call to eche other by their names,
and that they goe to the place which they call the goates marshe, as
unto a sacrifice. It seemeth this agreeth better with the first
historie when they called one another by their names in the night,
going against the LATINES: onles peradventure these two thinges after
many yeres happened upon one daye. Furthermore, they saye Romulus was
taken out of the worlde, when he was foure and fiftie yeres of age,
and had raigned eight and thirtie yeres by accompt.

THE COMPARISON OF THESEVS WITH ROMULUS

THUS have we declared all things of Theseus and Romulus worthy
memorie. But to compare the one with the other, it appeareth first
that Theseus of his owne voluntatie will, without compulsion of any
(when he might with safety have reigned in the cittie of TROEZEN, and
succeeded his grandfather in no small kingdome) dyd desire of him
selfe, and rather sought meanes to aspire to great things:
{magnanimitie+} and that Romulus on the other side, to deliver him
self from bondage and servitude that laye sore upon him, and to escape
the threatned punishment which still dyd hange over his head, was
certainely compelled (as Plato sayeth) to shewe him selfe hardie for
feare: who seeing howe extremely he was like to be handled, was of
very force constrained to seeke adventure, and hazarde the enterprise
of attaining highe and great things. Moreover the chiefest acte that
ever he dyd was, when he slewe one onely tyranne of the circle of ALBA
called Amulius: where Theseus in his jorney only, as he travelled,
gave his minde to greater enterprises, & slewe Sciron, Sinnis,
Procruiles, and Corynetes. And by ridding them out of the worlde, he
delivered GRFCE of all those cruell tyrannes, before any of those
knewe him whom he had delivered from them. {tyrannicide+} Furthermore,
he might have gone TO ATHENS by sea, and never needed to have
travelled, or put him selfe in daunger with these robbers, considering
he never receyved hurte by any of them: where as Romulus could not be
in safetie whilest Amulius lived. Hereupon it maye be alledged, that
Theseus unprovoked by any private wronge or hurte receyved, dyd set
upon these detestable theves and robbers: Remus and Romulus
contrariwise, so longe as the tyranne dyd them no harme, dyd suffer
him to oppresse and wronge all other. And if they alledge these were
noble dedes, and worthy memorie: {posterity+} that Romulas was hurte
fighting against the SABYNES, & that he slewe king Acron with his owne
handes, and that he had overcome and subdued many of his enemies. Then
for Theseus on thother side may be objected, the battell of the
CENTAVRI, the warres of the AMAZONES, the tribute due to the king of
CRETA: and howe he ventered to goe him selfe thither with the other
young boyes and wenches of ATHENS, as willingly offering him selfe to
be devowred by a cruell beaste, or els to be slayne and sacrificed
upon the tumbe of Androgeus, or to become bondslave and tyed in
captivitie to the vile service of cruell men and enemies, if by his
corage and manhodde he could not deliver him self. This was such an
acte of magnanimitie+, justice+ and glorie, and briefly of so great
vertue, that it is unpossible truely to be set out. Surely me thinckes
the philosophers dyd not ill define love+, when they sayd she was a
servitour of the goddes, to save younge folkes, whom they thought
meete to be preserved. For, the love of Ariadne was in mine opinion
the worke of some god, and a meane purposely prepared for Theseus
safety. Therefore the woman is not to be reproached nor blamed for the
love she bare Theseus, but rather it is muche to be wondred at, that
every man and woman in like wise dyd not love him. And if of her selfe
she fell in love with him, I saye (and not without cause) she
afterwards deserved to be beloved of a god, as one that of her owne
nature loved valiantnes and honour, & entertained men of singuler
value. But both Theseus and Romulus being naturally geven to rule and
raigne, neither the one nor the other kept the true forme of a King,
but bothe of them dyd degenerate alike: the one chaunging him self
into a popular man, the other to a very tyranne. So that by sundrie
humours, they both fell into one mischief & errour. For a prince above
all things must keepe his estate: which is no lesse preserved by doing
nothing uncomely, as by doing all things honorably. But he that is
more severe or remisse then he should be, remaineth now no more a King
or a prince, but becommeth a people pleaser, {Hal+} or a cruell
tyrante: and so causeth his subjects to despise or hate him. Yet me
thinckes the one is an errour of to muche pittie and basenes: and the
other of to muche pryde & crueltie. But if we maye not charge fortune+
with all mischaunces happening unto men, but that we ought to consider
in them the diversities of manners & passions, seeing anger+ is
unreasonable, & wrathe rashe and passionate: then can we not clere the
one, nor excuse the other of extreme rage and passion, in the facte
committed by the one against his brother, and by the other against his
naturall sonne. Howbeit the occasion and beginning of anger doth muche
excuse Theseus who moved with the greatest cause that might be, was
put into suche choller and passion. But if Romulus variaunce with his
brother had proceeded of any matter of counsell, or cause of the
common weales: there is none so simple to thincke, that his wisdome
would so sodainely have set upon him. Where as Theseus in contrarie
manner killed his sonne, provoked by those passions that fewe men can
avoyde: to wit, love, jelousie, and false reporte of his
wife. Moreover Romulus anger went to the effect, whereof the issue
fell out very lamentable: Theseus anger stretched no further, then to
roughe wordes, and olde folkes curses in their heate. For it seemeth,
cursed fortune, and nought els, was the cause of his sonnes only
mishappe, as forespoken and wished for somewhat by his father. These
be the speciall things maye be alledged for Theseus. But for Romulus
this was a noble thing in him. First his beginning being very lowe and
meane, and his brother and he taken for bonde men, and the children of
hoggeheards, before they were them selves all free, they set at
libertie in manner all the LATINES, winning at one instant many titles
of glorie and honour: as distroyers of their enemies, defenders of
their parents, Kings of nations, founders of newe citties, and no
overthrowers of the olde, where as Theseus of many habitations and
houses made onely one, & dyd overthrowe & plucke downe divers states,
bearing the names of auncient Kings, princes, and halfe goddes of
ATTICA. All these also dyd Romulus afterwards and compelled his
enemies whom he had overcome, to distroye their owne houses, and to
come and dwell with their conquerours. And in the beginning, he never
chaunged nor increased any cittie that was buylt before, but buylt him
selfe a newe cittie out of the grounde, getting all together, land,
countrie, kingdome, kindred & mariages, without losing or killing any
man: and to the contrarie, rather he dyd good to many poore vagabonds,
who had neither countrie, lands, nor houses, and desired nothing els
but to make a people amongest them, and to become cittizens of some
cittie. Also Romulus bent not him selfe to follow theeves and robbers,
but subdued by force of armes many mightie and puissant people: he
tooke circles, & triumphed over Kings and princes which he had
vanquished in battel. And touching the murder of Remus, it is not
certainely knowen of whose hands he dyed. The most parte of authors
doe charge other with the death of him. But it is certaine that
Romulus delivered his mother from apparant death, and restoted his
grandfather to the royal throne of AEneas, who before was deposed and
brought from a King to servill obedience, without any regarde of
honour or dignitie: to whom he dyd many moe great pleasures and
services. Besides he never offended him willingly, no not so muche as
ignorantly. Contrarylie I thincke of Theseus, who fayling by
negligence to put out his white sayle at his returne, cannot be
cleared of parricide, howe eloquent an oration soever could be made
for his excuse: yea though it were before the most favorable judges
that could be. Wherefore an ATHENIAN very well perceyving that it was
an harde thing to excuse and defend so fowle a faulte, dothe fayne
that the good olde man, AEgeus having newes brought him that his
sonnes shippe was at hand, dyd ronne in so great haste to his castell,
to see his sonne arrive a farre of, that as he ranne, his foote hit
against some thing, & overthrewe him: as though he had none of his
people about him, or that never a man seeing him ronne so hastely to
the sea side, dyd make haste to attende & wayte upon him. Furthermore,
Theseus faults touching women & ravishements, of the twaine, had the
lesse shadowe & culler of honestie. Bicause Theseus dyd attempt it
very often: for he stale awaye Ariadne, Antiope, & Anaxo the
Troezenian. Againe being stepped in yeres, & at later age, & past
mariage: he stale awaye Helen in her minorities being nothing neere to
consent to marye. Then his taking of the daughters of the TROEZENIANS,
of the LACEDAEMONIANS, and the AMAZONES (neither contracted to him,
nor comparable to the birthe and linadge of his owne countrie which
were at ATHENS, and descended of the noble race and progenie of
Erichtheus, and of Cecrops) dyd geve men occasion to suspect that his
womannishenes was rather to satisfie lust+, then of any great
love. Romulus nowe in a contrarie manner, when his people had taken
eight hundred, or thereabouts, of the Sabyne women to ravishe them:
kept but onely one for him selfe that was called Hersilia, as they
saye, and delivered the reste to his best and mowt honest
cittizens. Afterwardes by the honour, love, and good entertainment
that he caused them to have and receyve of their husbands, he chaunged
this violent force of ravishement, into a most perfect bonde and
league of amitie: which dyd so knyt and joyne in one these two
nations, that it was the beginning of the great mutual love which
grewe afterwards betwext those two people, and consequently of the
joyning of their powers together. Furthermore, time hath geven a good
testimonie of the love, reverence, constancie, kyndenes, and all
matrimonial offices that he established by that meanes, betwext man
and wife. For in two hundred and thirtie yeres afterwards, there was
never man that durst forsake or put awaye his wife, nor the wife her
husband. And as among the GRECIANS, the best learned men, and most
curious observers of antiquities doe knowe his name, that was the
first murderer of his father or mother: even so all the ROMAINES knewe
what he was, which first durst put away his wife. It was one called
Spurius Carvilius, bicause his wife was barren and had no
children. The effects also doe agree with the testimonie of the
time. For the Realme was common unto Kings of both nations, & through
the alliance of these mariages that beganne first of ravishements,
both nations lived peaciblie, & in equalitie, under one civill
policie, and well governed common weale. The ATHENIANS contrariewise,
by Theseus mariages, dyd get neither love nor kynred of any one
persone, but rather they procured warres, enmities, and the slaughter
of their cittizens, with the losse in the ende of the cittie of
APHIDNES: and yet very hardely, and by the mercie of their enemies
(whom they honored as godds) they escaped for him, the daunger which
the TROIANS suffered afterwards, for the self acte done by Alexander
Paris. {lust+} So it fell out at the last, that his mother was not
only in daunger, but even feelingly suffered like miserie and
captivitie, which Hecuba dyd afterwards, when she was forsaken of her
sonne: onles peradventure those things that they write of the
imprisonment and captivitie of AEtbra, be founde false, and but
fables, as for the fame and memorie of Theseus were behovefull, that
both it, and many other things also, were of no more trothe nor
likelyhood. That which they write of Romulus divinements, maketh great
difference betwene him and Theseus. For Romulus in his birthe was
preserved by the marvelous favour of the goddes: Theseus to the
contrarie, was begotten against the goddes will, as appeared plainely
by the aunswer of the oracle to AEgeus, that he should not medle with
any woman in straunge and foraine countrie. The ende of Romulus life.

The Life of Lycurgus+

A MAN can not speake any thing at all of Lycurgus, who made the lawes
of the LACEDAEMONIANS, but he shall finde great contrarietie of him
amongest the historiographers. For, of his parentage and travaill out
of his countrie, of his deathe & making of lawes, of his forme and
government, and order of executing the same, they have written
diversely. And yet above all things, concerning him, they agree worst
about the time he lived in. For some of them (and Aristotle is of that
number) will needes have him to have bene in the time of Ipbytus, and
that he dyd helpe him to stablish the ordinaunce that all warres
should cease during the feast of the games olympicall: for a
testimonie whereof, they alledge the copper coyne which was used to be
throwen in those games, and had founde graven upon it, the name of
Lycurgus. Other compting the dayes and time of the succession of the
kings of LACEDAEMON (as Eratosthenes, and Apollodorus) saye he was
many yeres before the first Olympiades. Timaeus also thincketh there
were two of this name, and in divers times: howbeit the one having
more estimation then the other, men gave this Lycurgus the glorie of
both their doings. Some saye the eldest of the twaine, was not longe
after Homer: and some write they sawe him. Xenophon sheweth us
plainely he was of great antiquitie: saying he was in the time of the
Heraclides, who were neerest of bloude by descent to Hercules. For it
is likely Xenophon ment not those Heraclides, which descended from
Hercules self: for the last kings of SPARTA were of Hercules progenie,
aswell as the first. Therefore he meaneth those Heraclides, which
doubtles were the first & nearest before Hercules time. Nevertheles
though the historiographers have written diversely of him, yet we will
not leave to collect that which we finde written of him in auncient
histories, and is least to be denied, and by best testimonies most to
be prooved. And first of all, the poet Simonides sayeth, his fathe
rwas called Prytanis and not Eunomus: and the most parte doe write the
pettigree otherwise, aswell of Lycurgus self, as of Eunomus. For they
saye, that Patrocles the sonne of Aristodemus begate Sous, and Sous
begate Eurytion, and Eurytion begate Prytanis, and Prytanis begat
Eunomus, and Eunomus begat Polydectes of his flrst-wife, and Lycurgus
of the second wife, called Dianassa: yet Euthychidas an other writer,
maketh Lycurgus the sixte of descent in the right line from Poldectes,
and the eleventh after Hercules. But of all his auncesters, the
noblest was Sous, in whose time the cittie of SPARTA subdued the
Ilotes, and made them slaves, and dyd enlarge and increase their
dominion, with the lands and possessions they had got by conquest of
the Arcadians. And it is sayed that Sous him self being on a time
straightly besieged by the CLITORIANS, in a hard drye grounde, where
no water could be founde: offered them thereupon to restore all their
lands againe that he had gotten from them, if he and all his companie
dyd drincke of a fountaine that was there not farre of. The CLITORIANS
dyd graunte unto it, and peace also was sworne betweene them. Then he
called all his souldiers before him, and tolde them if there were any
one amongest them that 'would refrayne from drincking, he would
resigne his kingdome to him: howbeit there was not one in all his
companie that could (or would) forbeare to drincke, they were so sore
a thirst. So they all drancke hartely except him self, who being the
last that came downe, dyd no more but a litle moyste his mowthe
without, and so refreshed him self, the enemies selves standing by,
and drancke not a droppe. By reason whereof, he refused afterwards to
restore their lands he had promised, alledging they had not all
droncke. But that notwithstanding, he was greately esteemed for his
actes, and yet his house was not named after his owne name: but after
his sonnes name Eurytion, they of his house were called
Eurytionides. The reason was, bicause his sonne Eurytion to please the
people, dyd first let fall and geve over, the sole and absolute power
of a King. Whereupon there followed afterwardes marvellous disorder
and dissolution, {mob+} which continued a great time in the Cittie of
SPARTA. For the people finding them selves at libertie, became very
bolde and disobedient: and some of the Kinges that succeeded, were
hated even to deathe, bicause they woulde perforce use their auncient
authoritie over the people. Other, either to winne the love and
goodwilles of the people, or bicause they sawe they were not stronge
enough to rule them, dyd geve them selves to dissemble. And this dyd
so muche increase the peoples lose & rebellious mindes, that Lycurgus
owne father being Kinge, was slayne among them. For one daye, as he
was parting a fraye betweene two that were fighting, he had suche a
wounde with a kytchin knyfe, that he dyed: and left his Realme to his
eldest sonne Polydectes, who dyed also sone after and without heyre of
his bodye as was supposed. In so muche as every man thought Lycurgus
should be Kinge: and so he tooke it upon him, untill it was
understoode that his brothers wife was younge with childe. Which thing
so soone as he perceyved, he published openly; that the Realme
belonged to the childe that should be borne, if it were a sonne. After
this he governed the Realme, but as the Kings lieutenants and
regent. The LACEDAEMONIANS call the regents of their Kinges that are
left within age, Prodicos. Lycurgus brothers widow dyd send, and let
him secretly understande, that if he would promise to marye her when
he should be King, that she would come before her time, and either
miscarye, or destroye that she went with. Lycurgus detestably
abhorring this brutishe and savage unnaturallnes of the woman, dyd not
reject her offer made him, but seemed rather to be very glad, then to
dislike of it. Nevertheles he sent her worde againe, she should not
neede to trye masteryes, with drinckes & medicines to make her come
before her time: for so doing, she might bring her selfe in daunger,
and be cast awaye for ever. Howbeit he advised her to goe her full
time, and to be brought a bed in good order, and then he would finde
meanes enough to make awaye the childe that should be borne. And so
with suche persuasions he drewe on this woman to her full time of
deliveries. But so soone as he perceyved she was neere her time, he
sent certaine to keepe her, and to be present at her laboure,
commaunding them that if she were brought a bed of a daughter, they
should leave her with the woman: & if it were a sonne, they should
forthwith bring it to him, in what place soever he was, and what
busines soever he had in hand. It chaunced that she came even about
supper time, and was delivered of a sonne. As he was sitting at the
table with the other magistrates of the cittie, his servants entred
the halle, and presented to him the litle babe, which he tenderly
tooke in his armes, and sayed openly to them that were present:
beholde my lordes of SPARTA, here is a Kinge borne unto us. And
speaking these wordes, he layed him downe in the Kinges place, and
named him Charilaus, as muche to saye, as the joye of the
people. {magnanimous+} Thus he sawe all the lookers on rejoycing
muche, & might heare them prayse & extoll his synceritie, justice+,
and vertue. By this meanes he raigned only as King, but eight
moneths. From thenceforth he was taken and esteemed so just and
syncere a man among the cittizens, that there were moe that willingly
obeyed him for his vertue then for that he was the Kings regent, or
that he had the government ofthe whole Realme in his
hands. {reciprocity+} Notwithstanding there were some that bare him
displeasure and malice, who sought to hinder and disgrace his credit,
and chiefly the friends and kinred of the Kings mother: whose power
and honour were thought much impayred by Lycurgus authoritie. In so
much, as a brother of hers called Leonidas, entring boldly into great
words with him on a daye, dyd not sticke to say to his face. I knowe
for a certaintie one of these dayes thou wilt be King: meaning thereby
to bring him in suspicion with the cittizens. Which thing though
Lyrurgus never ment, yet of a subtill and craftie wit Leonidas thought
by geving out such words, that if the young King happened to dye in
his minoritie naturally, it would be mistrusted that Lycurgus had
secretly made him awaye. The Kings mother also gave out such like
speaches, which in the end dyd so trouble him, with the feare he had,
what event might fall out thereof: that he determined to departe his
countrie, & by his absence to avoyde the suspition that therein might
growe upon him any waye. So he travelled abroade in the worlde as a
straunger, untill his nephew had begotten a sonne who was to succeede
him in him in his kingdome. He having with this determination taken
his jorney went first of all into CRETA, where he diligently observed
and considered their manner of their living, the order of the
government of their Common weale, and ever kept company with the best,
& ever was conferring with the most learned. There he founde very good
lawes in his judgement, which he noted of purpose to carie home to his
countrie, to serve when time should come. He founde there other lawes
also, but of them he made no reckoning. Nowe there was one man that
above the rest was reputed wise and skilfull in matters of state &
government, who was called Thales: with whom dyd so much by intreatie,
and for familier friendshippe, that he persuaded him to goe with him
unto Sparta. This Thales was called the Poet Harper, whereupon he had
that title and name: but in effect he sange all that the best and
sufficientest governours of the worlde could devise. For all his
songes were goodly ditties, wherein he dyd exhorte and persuade the
people to live under obedience of the law, in peace & concorde one
with the other. His words were set out with such tunes, countenance, &
accents, that were so full of swetenes, harmony, & pearsing: that
inwardly it melted mens heartes, and drue the hearers of a love to
like the most honest things, and to leave all hatred, enmitie,
sedition, & division, which at that time reigned sore among them. So
as it maye be sayed he it was that prepared the waye for Lycurgus,
whereby he afterwards reformed & brought the LACEDAEMONIANS unto
reason. At his departing out of CRETA, he went into ASIA, with intent
(as it is sayed) to compare the manner of life and pollicie of those
of CRETA (being then very straight and severe) with the superfluities
& vanities of IONIA: and thereupon to consider the difference betwene
their two manners & go- verntnents, as the physitian doth, who to
knowe the hole and healthful the better, doth use to compare them with
the sicke and diseased. It is very likely it was there, where he first
sawe Homers works, in the hands of the heires & successours of Cleo
phylus: and finding in the same, aswer many rules of policie, as the
great pleasure of Poets faining, he diligently coppied it out, & made
a volume thereof to carie into GRECE. It is true there was much fame
abroad of Homers poesies among the GRECIANS, howbeit there were fewe
of them brought together, but were scattered here and there in divers
mens hands, in pampflets and peces unsowed and without any order: but
the first that brought them most to light among men, was Lycurgus. The
AEGYPTIANS saye that he was in their countrie also, and that having
founde there one notable ordinaunce among other, that their souldiers
& men of warre were separated from the rest of the people, he brought
the practise of it into SPARTA: where setting the marchants+,
artificers, & labourers every one a parte by them selves, he did
establish a noble Common wealth. So the AEYPTIAN historiographers, and
some others also of GRECE doe write. He was also in AFRICKE, and in
SPAYNE, & as farre as INDIA, to conferre with the wise men there that
were called the philosophers_of_INDIA+. I knowe no man that hathe
written it, saving Aristocrates, that was Hipparchus sonne. The
LACEDAEMONIANS wished for him often when he was gone, and sent divers
and many a time to call him home: who thought their Kings had but the
honour and title of Kings, and not the vertue or majestie of a prince,
whereby they dyd excell the common people. But as for Lycurgus, they
thought of him thus: that he was a man borne to rule, to commaund, and
to geve order, as having in him a certaine naturall grace and power,
to drawe men willingly to obeye him. Moreover the Kings them selves
were not unwilling to have him to returne home, bicause they hoped
that his presence would somwhat brydle, and restrayne the people from
their insolencie and disobedience towards them. Whereupon Lycurgus
returning home in this opinion and affecton of men, it fell out that
he was no sooner arrived, but he beganne to devise howe to alter the
whole government of the commonweale, and throughout to chaunge the
whole course and order of the state: thincking that to make only
certaine particular lawes were to no purpose, but much like, as one
should geve some easie medicine, to purge an overthrowen bodye with
all humours and diseases. Therefore he thought first that all grosse
and superfluous humours, were meete to be dissolved and purged, and
then afterwardes to geve them a new forme and order of
government. When he had thus determined with him self, before he would
take in hand to doe any thing, he went to the citty of DELPHES: where
after he had sacrificed to Apollo, he consulted with him about his
matters. From whom he returned with this glorious title by the oracle
of Pythia: O beloved of the goddes, and rather god then man. Where
when he craved grace of Apollo to establishe good lawes in his
countrie, it was aunswered him: that Apollo graunted his petition, and
that he should ordaine the hest and perfectest manner of a Common
wealth, that ever had or should be in the worlde. This aunswer dyd
comforte him very much, and so he beganne to breake his purpose to
certen of the chief of the cittle, and secretly to praye and exhorte
them to helpe him, going first to those he knew to be his friends, and
after by litle and litle he wanne others to him, who joyned with him
in his enterprise. So when he saw the time fit for the matter, he
caused thirtie of the chiefest men of the cittie in a morning to come
into the market place well appointed and furnished, to suppresse those
that would attempt to hinder their purpose. Hermippus the
historiographer rehearseth twentie of the chiefest: but he that above
all others dyd most assist him in his doings, and was the greatest
ayde unto the stablishing of his lawes, was called Arithmiadas. The
king Charilaus hearing of this assembly, dyd feare there had bene some
conspiracie or insurrection against his person, and for his safety he
fled into the temple of Juno, called Chalceacos, as much to saye, as
Junos brasen Temple. Howbeit afterwards when he knew the trothe, he
waxed bolde, and came out of the temple againe, and he him self
favored the enterprise, being a prince of a noble minde, howbeit very
soft by nature, as witnesseth Archelaus (that was then the other king
of LACEDAEMON) by telling how Charilaus aunswered one that praised him
to his face, in saying he was a good man. And how should I not (quoth
he) be good, when I cannot be evill to the evill? {bleeding_heart+} In
this chaunge of the state, many things were altered by Lycurgus, but
his chiefest alteration was, his lawe of the erection of a Senate,
which he made to have a regall power and equall authoritie with the
Kings in matters of weight and importance, and was (as Plato sayeth)
to be the healthful counterpease of the whole bodye of the Common
weale. The other state before was ever wavering, somtime inclining to
tyrannie, when the Kings were to mightie: and somtime to confusion,
when the people would usurpe authoritie. Lycurgus therfore placed
betwene the Kings & the people, a counsaill of Senatours, which was as
a stronge beame, that helde bothe these extreames in an even ballance,
and gave sure footing and ground to either parte, to make strong the
state of the comonweale. For the eight & twenty Senatours (which made
the whole bodye of the Senate) tooke somtime the Kings parte, when it
was nedefull to pull downe the furie of the people: {mob+} and
contrarilie, they held sometimes with the people against the Kings, to
bridle their tyran- nicall government. Aristotle sayeth, he ordeined
the number of Senatours to be but eight and twenty, bicause two of
thirtie that joyned with him as a fore, dyd for feare forsake him at
this enterprise. Howbeit Spharus writeth, that from the beginning, he
never purposed to have more then eight and twenty to be the
Senate. And perhappes he had great regard to make it a perfect number
considering it is compounded of the number of seven, multiplied by
foure: and is the first perfect number next to six, being equall to
all partes gathered together. But as for me, my opinion is, he chose
this number rather then any other, bicause he ment the whole bodye of
the counsaill should be but thirtie persones, adding to that number,
the two Kinges. Lycurgus tooke so great care to establishe well this
counsell, that he brought an oracle for it, from Abolloes temple in
DELPHES. This oracle is called unto this daye Retra, as who would
saye, the statute oracle: whereof the aunswer was. When thou hast
built a temple unto Jupiter the Syllanian, and to Minerva the
Syllanian, and devided the people into lineages, thou shalt stablishe
a Senate of thirtie counsellers, with the two Kings: & shalt assemble
the people at times convenient, in the place betweene the bridge and
the river Cnacion. There the Senatours shall propound all matters, and
breake up after their assemblies: and it shall not be lawfull for the
people to speake one worde. In those dayes the people were ever
assembled betweene two rivers, for there was no hall to assemble a
counsaill -at large, nor any other place prepared for them. For
Lycurgus thought no builded place meete for men to geve good counsaill
in, or to determine causes, but rather a hinderanced bicause in such
places men be drawen to muse on vaine things, and their mindes be
caried awaye with beholding the images, tables, & pictures, comonly
set up for ornament in such open places. And if it be in a Theater,
then beholding he place where the playes and sportes be made, they
thincke more of them, then any counsaill. Againe, if it be in a great
hall, then of the fayer embowed or vawted roofes, or of the fretised
seelings curiously wrought, and sumptuously set forth, and tend not
still their busines they come for. When the people were assembled in
counsaill, it was not lawfull for any of them to put forth matters to
the counsell to be determined, neither might any of them deliver his
opinion what he thought of any thinge: but the people had onely
authoritie to geve their assent (if they thought good) to the things
propounded by the Senatours, or the two Kings. Howbeit afterwardes,
the two Kings Polydorus and Theopompus, bicause the people dyd many
times crosse and alter the determination of the Senate, by taking away
or adding some thing to it, they dyd adde these wordes to the oracle
aforesaid. That if the people would not assent to any ordinaunce of
the Senate, then should it be lawfull for the Kings & Senate to breake
up the counsell, and to frustrate all things done in the same: the
wise advise of the Senate being encountered thus, and their meaning to
the best, so perverted to the worse. These two Kings persuaded the
people, that at the very first, this addition came with the oracle of
Apollo: as the poet Tyrtaeus maketh mention in the place, where he
sayeth: From Delphos Ile, this oracle is brought of Pythia: into their
countrye soyle. The Kings (even they to whom of right there ought a
loving care in princely breasts to boyle, the Spartane wealthe, to
garde from every spoyle:) Shalbe the chief, grave causes to decyde
with Senatours: whose sounde advise is tride. And next to them, the
people shall fulfill as muche as seemes, to please their princes will.
Lyurgus now having thus tempered the forme of his comon weale, it
seemed notwithstanding to those that came after him, that this small
number of thirtie persones that made the Senate, was yet to mightie,
and of to great authoritie. Wherefore to bridle them in a litle, they
gave them (as Plato sayeth) a bytte in their mouths, & that was the
authoritie of the Ephores, which signifie as much as comptrollers: &
were elected about a hundred & thirtie yeres after the death of
Lycurgus. The first which was chosen of these, was Elatus, and it was
in the time of king Theopompus, whose wife on a daye in her anger
sayed: howe throughe his negligence he would leave lesse to his
successours, then he had receyved of his predecessours. To whom he
aunswered againe, not lesse but more, for that it shall continue
lenger, & with a more suertie. For, in losing thus their too absolute
power, that wrought them great envie and hatred among their cittizens,
they dyd escape the daunger and mischief that their neighbours the
ARGIVES, and MESSENIANS dyd feele: who would not geve over the
soveraine authoritie which they had gotten once. {give+} This example
maketh Lycurgus great wisdome and foresight manifestly knowen: who so
will deeply consider the seditions and ill governements of the
ARGIVES, and MFSSENIANS (their neere neighbours and kinsemen) aswer
from the people, as from the Kings. Who from the beginning had all
things alike to the SPARTANS: and in deviding of their lands a farre
better order then theirs. This notwithstanding, they dyd not prosper
longe: but through the pryde of their Kings, and the disobedience of
their people, they entred into civill warres one against another,
shewing by their disorders and misfortunes the speciall grace the
godds dyd beare to SPARTA, to geve them such a reformer, as dyd so
wisely temper the state of their common weale, as we will shewe
hereafter. {mob+} The second lawe that Lycurgus made, and the boldest
and hardest he ever tooke in hande, was the making of a newe division
of their lands. For he sawe so great a disorder and unequality among
the inhabitants, aswell of the countrie, as of the citie LACEDAEMON,
by reason some (and the greatest number of them) were so poore, that
they had not a handfull of grounde, and other some being least in
number were very riche, that had all: he thought with him self to
banishe out of the cittie all insolencie, envie, covetousness and
deliciousness and also all riches and povertie, which he tooke the
greatest, and the most continuall plagues of a cittie, or
commonweale. {land_reform+} For this purpose, he imagined there was
none so ready & necessarie a meane, as to persuade his cittizens to
suffer all the landes, possessions, and inheritance of their countries
to ronne in common together: and that they should make a newe division
equally in partition amongest them selves, to live from thencefotth as
it were like brothers together, so that no one were richer then
another, & none should seeke to go before eache other, any other waye
then in vertue only: thincking there should be no difference or
unequalitie among inhabitants of one cittie, but the reproaches of
dishonestie, and the prayses of vertue. Thus Lycurgus following his
determination, dyd out of hande make a lawe of the division of their
lands. For first he dyd devide all the countrie of LACONIA, into
thirtie thousand equall partes, the which he dyd set out for those
that inhabited about SPARTA and of those landes that joyned next to
the cittie of SPARTA, that was the chief metropolitan cittie of
LACONIA, he made other nine thousand partes, which he devided to the
naturall cittizens of SPARTA, who be those that are properly called
Spartans. Howbeit some will saye, he made but sixe thousand parts, and
that king Polydorus afterwards dyd adde to other three thousand
partes. Other saye also, that Lycurgus of these nine thousand par- tes
made but the halfe onely, & Polydorm the rest. Every one of these
partes was such, as might yelde unto the owner yerely, three score and
tenne bushels of barley for a man, and twelve bushels for the woman,
and of wine and other liquide fruites, much like in proportion: which
quantitie Lycurgus judged to be sufficient, to kepe the bodye of a man
in health, and to make him stronge and lustie, without any further
allowance. They saye after this, as he returned home one day out of
the fields, and came over the lands where wheate had bene reaped not
longe before, and sawe the number of sheaves lying in every shocke
together, and no one shocke bigger then another: he fell a laughing,
and told them that were with him, me thinks all LACONIA is as it were
an inheritance of many brethern, who had newly made partition
together. He gave an attempt to have devided also moveables, & to have
made a common partition betwene them, to thend he would have utterly
taken away all unequalitie. But finding the cittizens tooke it very
impatiently, that openly that which they had, should be taken awaye:
he went about to doe it more secretly, and in a conninger wise to take
away that covetousness. For first of all, he dyd forbid all coyne of
golde and sylver to be currant: and then he dyd set out certaine
coynes of iron which he commaunded only to be currant, whereof a great
weight and quantitie was but litle worthe. So as to laye up therof the
value of tenne Minas, it would have occupied a whole celler in a
house, besides it would have neded a yoke of oxen to carie it any
where. Nowe golde and silver being thus banished out of the countries
many lewde partes & faultes must needes cease thereby. For who would
robbe, steale, picke, take awaye, hyde, procure, or whorde up any
thing, that he had no great occasion to desire, nor any profit to
possesse, nor would be any pleasure to use or employe. For, the iron
they occupied for their coyne, they cast vineger upon it while it was
redde hotte out of the fire, to kill the strength and working of it to
any other use: for thereby it was so eger and brickle, that it would
byde no hammer, nor could be made, beaten, or forged to any other
facion. By this meanes he banished also, all superfluous and
unprofitable sciences, which he knew he should not neede to doe by any
proclamation: bicause they would fall awaye (or the most parte of
them) even of them selves, when the basenes of the money they should
take for their worke, should undoe them. For their iron moneys were
not currant els where in the citties of GRECE, but every bodye made a
jeste of it there. By this occasion, the LACEDAEMONIANS could buye no
forrein wares nor marchandises, neither came there any shippe into
their haven to trafficke with them, {trade+} neither any fine curious
Rethorician dyd repaire into their countrie to teache them eloquence,
and the cunning cast of lying: nor yet came there to them any wysard
to tell them their fortune, nor any Pander to keepe any brothell
house, nor yet goldssmithe or jueller, to make or sell any toyes or
trifles of golde or silver to set forth women: considering all thess
things are used to be made to get money, & to hourd up that they had
not. After this sorte, delicatenes that wanted many things that
entertained it, beganne by litle and litle to vanishe awaye, and
lastely, to fall of from them selves: when the most riche men had no
more occasion then the poorest, and riches having no meane to shewe
her selfe openly in the worlde, was fayne to remaine shut at home
idely, as not able to doe her master any service. Thereupon moveables
& householde stuffe (which a man cannot be without, and must be daylie
occupied) as bedsteades, tables, chayers, and suche like necessaries
for house, were excellently well made: and men dyd greatly prayse the
facion of the LACONIAN cuppe which they called Cothon, and specially
for a souldier in the warres, as Critias was wont to saye. For it was
made after such a facion, that the culler of it dyd let the eye to
discerne the fowle and unwholsome water, which men are driven
oftetimes to drinke in a campe, & goeth many times against ones
stomake to see it: and if by chaunce there was any filth or mudde in
the bottome, it would cleave and sticke fast upon the ribbes of the
bellie, and nothing came through the necke, but cleane water to his
mouth that drancke it. The reformer of their state was the cause of
all this: bicause their artificers tending now no superfluous works,
were occupied about the making of their most necessary
things. Further, nowe to drive awaye all superfluitie and
deliciousness and to roote out utterly desire to get and gather: he
made another thirde lawe for eating and drincking, and against feastes
and banckets. First he willed and commaunded the cittizens, that they
should eate together all of one meate, and chiefly of those he had
permitted by his ordinance. Then he dyd expressely forbid them to eate
alone, or a parte, or secretly by them selves, upon riche tables and
sumptuous beddes, abusing the labour of excellent worcke men, & the
devises of likerous cookes to cramme them selves in corners, as they
doe fatte up beastes & poultrie, which doth not only breede ill
conditions in the minde, but dothe marre the complexions of men, and
the good states of their bodie, when they give them selves over to
such sensualitie and gluttonie. Whereof it followeth in the ende that
men must needes sleepe muche, to helpe to disgest the excesse of
meates they have taken, and then must they goe to the whotte houses to
bathe them selves, and spend long time about the ordinarie attendance
of their sickely bodies. This was a marveilous thing for him to bring
to passe, but much more, to make riches not to be stolen, and least of
all to be coveted, as Theophrastus sayd of him: which by this meanes
of making them eate to- gether with all sobriety at their ordinarie
dyet was brought to passe. For there was no more meane to the riche,
then to the poore, to use to playe, or shewe riches, sithe both of
them were forced to be together in one place, and to eate all of one
meate: so as that which is commonly spoken, that Pluto the god of
riches is blinde, was truely verified only in the cittie of SPARTA,
above all other places of the worlde. For there riches was layed on
the grounde like a corse without a soule, that moveth no whit at all:
considering it was not lawfull for any man to eate at home secretly in
his house, before he came to their open halles, nor might not come
thither for a countenance only to his meales being already fedde and
full fraight. For every mans eye was upon those specially which did
not eate & drincke with a good stomake amongest them: and it was the
use to reproche them as gluttons, & dayntie mouthed men, which refused
to eate as it were in common together. So as this was the ordinance
they saye, that grieved most the riche above all that Lycurgus made,
and whereat they were most madde and angrie with him: in so muche, as
on a daye, they all setting upon him to alter it, he was compelled to
ronne out of the market place, and getting grounde of them, he
recovered the liberties of a churche, before any could overtake him:
saving one young man called Alcander, who otherwise had no ill nature
in him, but that he was somewhat quicke of his hande, and cholericke
with all. Who following Lycurgus nerer then any other, dyd geve him a
blowe overthwart the face with a staffe, and strake out one of his
eyes, as Lycurgus turned toward him. Yet for all this, Lycurgus never
bashed or made worde at the matter, but dyd lifte up his head to those
that followed him, and shewed them his face all a gore bloude, and his
eye put out cleane: whereof they were all so sore ashamed, that there
was not a man that durst once open his mouth against him, but to the
contraries they seemed to pittie him, and dyd deliver Alcander into
his handes {Antonio+} that had done the dede, to punishe him as him
selfe pleased. And so they all brought him to his house, & shewed they
were right hartely sorie for his hurte. Lycurgus thancking them,
returned them all backe againe, save that he made Alcander to goe with
him into his house, where he never hurte him, nor gave him fowle
worde: {clemency+} but commaunded him onely to waite upon him, and
made his other ordinarie servaunts to withdraw their waiting. This
young man who now beganne to spye his owne faulte, dyd most willingly
attend upon him, & never spake worde to the contrarie. When he had
served him a certaine time, being very nere continually about him, he
beganne to feele and taste of his naturall liberalitie, and sawe of
what affection and intention Lycurgus was moved to doe all he dyd: he
perceyved what was the severitie of his ordinary life, and what his
constancy+ was to endure labour without weariness Alcander then
beganne to love and honour Lycurgus from his harte, and tolde his
parents and friends, howe he was no suche severe man as he seemed, but
was of so kynde and gentle a nature to all men as might be. See I
praye you howe Alcander was transformed by Lycurgus, and his
punishement also, which he should have receyved: for of a fierce,
rashe, and a lewde conditioned youth he was before, he became nowe a
very grave and wise man. But for memorie of this his misfortune,
Lycurgus built a temple to Minerva, which he surnamed Optiletide,
bicause the DORIANS which dwell in those partes of PELOPONNESUS, doe
call the eyes, optiles. There are other writers (as Dioscorides for
one) which saye Lycurgus had a blowe with a staffe, but he had not his
eye striken out with it: and how contrariwise, he founded this temple
to Minerva, to give her thanckes for healing of his eye. Hereof it
came, that ever since the SPARTANs have bene restray- ned to carie
staves in any assembly of counsell. But to returne to their common
repastes, which the CRETANS called Andria, & the LACEDAEMONIANS
Phiditia, either bicause they were places wherein they learned to live
soberly and straighdy (for in the GREKE tongue Phido, is to save and
spare) or els bicause their amitie & friendshippe grewe there towards
one another, as if they would have called them Philitia, feasts of
love, by chaunging d. into L: It maye be also they added the first
letter as superfluous, and ment to call the places Editia, bicause
they dyd eate and drincke there. They sat in their halles by fifteene
in a companie, litle more or lesse, and at the beginning of every
moneth every one brought a bushell of meale, eight gallons of wine,
five pound of cheese, and two pound and a halfe of figges for a man,
besides some litle portion of their monye to buye certaine freshe
acates. And over and above all this, every man when he dyd sacrifice
in his house, was bounde to send the best and chiefest things of his
sacrifice to the halles to be eaten. Likewise if any man went an
hunting, & killed any venison: it was an order, he should send a pece
of the fleshe thither. {hunter_gather+} Having these two lavfull
causes, they might eate and drinke by them selves at home, either when
they sacrificed any beast to the goddes, or when they came late home
from hunting: otherwise they were bounde of necessitie to meete in
their halles at meales, if they would eate any thing. This order they
kept very straightly a great time: in so muche as king Agis on a daye,
returning from the warres, where he had overthrowen the ATHENIANS, and
being desirous to suppe at home privately with the Queene his wife, he
sent to the halles for his portion. But the Polemarchi, that be
certaine officers assisting the Kings in warres, dyd denye him. The
next daye Agis left for spight, to doe the accustomed sacrifice they
were won to celebrate in the ende of every warre: whereupon they set a
fine on his head, and condemned him to paye it. The young children
also went to these repasts, even as they should goe to schooles to
learn gravity & temperaunce, where they heard wise and grave
discourses touching the government of a common weale, but not of
masters that were as hierlinges. There they learned pretylie to playe
upon wordes, and pleasauntly to sporte one with another, without any
broade speaches, or uncomely jestes, and at others handes to beare the
same againe, without choller or anger. {cheer+} For this propertie
have the LACEDAEMONIANS above all other, to take and geve a mocke
without any offence: nevertheless if any mans nature could not beare
it, he neded but praye the partie to forbeare his jesting, and so he
lefte it straight. And it was ever an ordinarie among them, that the
eldest of the companie tolde the rest that were come into the hall to
meale, with shewing them of the dore: Sirs, remember, there goeth not
a worde here out of this dore. Even so he that would be receyved to
meale there in their companie, must first of necessitie be allowed and
receyved in this sorte, by all the rest. Every one of them tooke a
litle balle of branne or dowe to washe their handes with, and without
ever a word speaking, they threwe it into a basen, which the servant
that waited on them at the table dyd carie upon his head: he that was
contented the other should be receyved in companie, dyd cast in his
balle as he dyd receyve it, but if he misliked him, then he pressed it
flat betwene his fingers, and threwe it in. This ball of branne thus
pressed flat, was asmuch as a beane bored thorough, and was to them a
signe of condemnation. If any one balle were found of this sorte, the
suter was rejected: for they would not have any enter into their
companies that was not liked of all the rest. He that thus was
rejected, they saye he was discadded: for the basin wherein the litle
balles were caried, was called Caddos.  The best dishe they served at
these meales, was that they call their blacke brothe: so that when
they had that, the olde men dyd eate no fleshe, but lefte it all to
the younge men, and they by them selves dyd eate the brothe. There was
a king of PONTVS, that being desirous to taste of this blacke broth,
dyd buye of purpose a LACEDEMONIAN cooke: but after he had once tasted
thereof, he was very angry straight. The cooke then sayed unto him:
and it please your grace, ere one shall finde this brothe good, he
must be washed first in the river of Eurotas. After they had eate and
druncke thus soberly together, every one repaired home without any
light: for it was not lawful for them to goe thither, nor any where
els with light, bicause they should accustome them selves boldely to
goe up and downe the darcke, and all about in the night. This was the
order and manner of their meales. But here is specially to be noted,
that Lycurgus would in no wise have any of his lawes put in
writing. For it is expressely set downe in his lawes they call Retra,
that none of his lawes should be written. {PlainDealer+} For he
thought that which should chiefly make a cittie happie, and vertuous,
ought throughly by education to be printed in mens heartes and
manners, as to have continuaunce for ever: which he tooke to be love
and good will, as a farre stronger knot to tye men with, then any
other compulsary lawe. Which when men by use and custome through good
education doe take in their childhoode, it maketh every man to be a
lawe to him selfe. Furthermore, concerning buying and barganing one
with another, which are but trifles, and sometime are chaunged in one
sorte, & sometime in another, as occasion serveth: he thought it best
not to constrayne them to doe it by writing, nor to establishe
customes that might not be altered, but rather to leave them to the
libertie and discretion of men which had bene brought up in the same,
bothe to take awaye, and to adde therein, as the case and time should
require. But to conclude, he thought the chiefest pointe of a good
lawe maker or reformer of the common weale was, to cause men to be
well brought up and instructed. One of his ordinaunces therefore was
expressely, that not one of his lawes should be written. Another of
his devises was, against superfluous charges and expences: which to
avoyde, he made a lawe that all roofes of houses should be made only
with the axe, and all gates and doores with the sawe, & that without
any other toole of occupation. Wherein he had the like imagination as
afterwards Epaminondas had, when he sayed, speaking of his table: Such
a borde never receyveth any treason. Even so thought Lycurgus, that
such a buylt house would never receyve curiositie+ or daintiness For
no man is so maddely disposed or simple witted, as to bring into so
poore and meane houses, bedsteades with silver feete, imbrodered
coverlettes, or counterpoyntes of purple silke, neither yet plate of
golde nor of silver, nor suche other like costly furniture and
finenes, as those things require to wayte upon them: bicause the
beddes must be aunswerable to the meanenes of the house, the
furnitures of the beddes must be sutelike to the same, and all other
householde stuffe, dyet, meate, & drincke agreable to the rest. Hereof
proceeded that, which Leontychidas the first King of that name, sayed
once: who supping on a time in the cittie of CORINTHE, and seeing the
roofe of the hall where he satte sumptuously embowed and carved, he
asked straight if the trees dyd growe carved so in that countrie. The
third lawe was, he dyd forbyd them to make warre often with one
enemie, lest the enemie forced to take often armes in hande, might in
the ende growe experter and vallianter then they. For this cause king
Agesilaus was greatly blamed, who was a longe time after. For by
making often warres with the countrie of BOEOTIA, he made the THEBANS
in the ende as expert and Valliant souldiers, as the
LACEDAEMONIANS. Whereupon Antalcidas seeing him hurte one daye, sayed
unto him: The THEBANS have nobely rewarded thee for their learning,
sith thou hast made them expert soldiers unwilling to learne the
discipline of warre. These be the lawes Lycurgus selfe called Retra,
and signifie as muche as Oracles, that the god Apollo had discovered
to him. Nowe the education of children, he esteemed the chiefest &
greatest matter, that a reformer of lawes should establishe. Therefore
beginning a farre of, he first considered the state of mariage, & the
generation of children. For Arisotle sayeth, that Lycurgus dyd attempt
to reforme women, and dyd soone geve it over againe: bicause he could
doe no good therein, by reason of the great libertie they had taken by
the absence of their husbands in the warres, compelled often so to be
abroade, & that they dyd leave them mistresses of their house, and at
their returne dyd honour them so muche, and make of them so beyonde
measure, with calling them ladyes and mistresses. Howbeit this is
true, that he had an eye to the rule and order of their life, aswell
as he had of mens: and so reason dyd require. First of all, he willed
that the maydens should harden their bodyes with exercise of running,
wresthng, throwe the barre, and casting the darte, to the ende that
the fruite wherewith they might be afterwardes conceyved, taking
norishement of a stronge and lustie bodye, should shoote out and
spread the better: and that they by gathering strength thus by
exercises, should more easely awaye with the paynes of childe
bearing. {Plato+} And to take awaye from them their womanishe
dayntines, and fines, he brought up a custome, for young maydes and
boyes to goe as it were a precession, and to daunce naked at solemne
feastes & sacrifices, and to singe certaine songes of their owne
making, in the presence and sight of young men. To whom by the waye
they gave many times prety mockes of purpose, as pleasauntly hitting
them home, for things wherein before they had forgotten their dueties:
and sometimes also in their songe for their vertues, wittes, or
manners, they praysed them which had deserved it. By this meanes, they
dyd set young mens hartes a fire, to strive to winne most prayse and
honour. For who so was praysed of them for a Valliant man, or whose
worthy actes were songe by them, he thereby was incoraged to doe the
better another time: & the pretie girles and quippes they gave to
others, was of no lesse force, then the sharpest wordes and
admonitions that otherwise could be geven them. This tooke place the
rather, bicause it was done in the presence of the Kings, the
Senatours, & all the rest of the cittizens which came thither to see
these sportes. And though the maydes dyd shewe them selves thus naked
openly, yet was there no dishonesty seene nor offred, but all this
sporte was full of playe and toyes, without any youthfuh parte or
wantonnes: and rather caried a shewe of demureness and a desire to
have their best made bodyes seene and spyed. Moreover, it somewhat
lifted up their hartes, and made them noblier minded, by geving them
to understand, that it was no lesse comely for them, in their kynde
and exercises to carie the bell, then it was for men in their games
and exercises to carie the price. Hereof it came, that the women of
LACEDAEMON were so bolde to saye, & thincke of them selves that, which
Gorgona the wife of king Leonidas one daye aunswered: being in talke
with a straunge woman that sayed to her. There be no women in the
worlde that commaund their husbands, but you wives of
LACEDAEMON. Whereto the Queene straight replyed: so be there no women
but we, which bringe forth men. Furthermore, these playes, sportes, &
daunses, the maydes dyd naked before younge men, were provocations to
drawe & allure the young men to marye: not as persuaded by
geometricall reasons, as sayeth Plato, but brought to it by very
liking, and of very love. Those which would not mary he made infamous
by lawe. For it was not lawfull for such to be present, where these
open games and pastimes were shewed naked. Furthermore, the officers
of the cittie compelled suche as would not marye, even in the hardest
time of the winter, to environne the place of these sportes, and to
goe up and downe starcke naked, and to singe a certaine songe made for
the purpose against them, which was: that iustely were they punished,
bicause that lawe they disobeyed. Moreover, when suche were olde, they
had not the honour and reverence done them, which old maried men
usually received. Therefore there was no man that misliked, or
reproved that, which was spoken to Dercillidas: albeit otherwise he
was a noble captaine. For comming into a presence there was a young
man which would not vowchesafe to rise and doe him reverence, not to
geve him place for to sit downe: and worthely, quoth he, bicause thou
hast not gotten a sonne, who maye doe so muche for me in time to
come. Those which were desirous to marie any, were driven to take them
awaye by force whom they would marie, not litle younge wenches I
meane, which were not of age to be maried: but lustie and strong
maides of age to beare children. And when one of them was stolen awaye
in this sorte, she that was privie thereto, and meane to make the
mariage came and shaved the heares of her head that was maried: then
she put her into mans apparell, & gave her all things sute like to the
same, and layed her upon a matteresse all alone, without light or
candell. After this was done, the bridegrooms, being neither droncke
nor finelier apparrelled then he was wonte to be, but having supped
soberly at his ordinarie, came home secretly to the house where the
bride was: & there untied his wives girdell, tooke her in his armes,
layed her upon a bed, and talked together a while, and afterwards
fayer and softely stole awaye to the place, where he was wonte to
sleep with other young men. And so from thenceforth, he continued
allwayes to doe the like, being all the daye time, sleeping most of
the night, with his companions, onles he sometime stale to see his
wife, being affrayed, and ashamed ever to be seene, by any of the
house where she was. And hereunto his younge wife did helpe for her
parte, to spy meanes and occasions howe they might mete together, and
not be seene. This manner endured a great while, and untill somme of
them had children, before they boldely met together, and sawe eache
other on the daye time. This secret meeting in this sorte did serve to
good pur poses, not only bicause it was some meane of continencie and
shamefastnes, but also it kept their bodies in strength and better
state, to bring forth children. It continued also in both parties, a
still burning love, and a newe desire of the one to the other, not as
it were luke warme, nor wearie, as theirs commonly be which have their
bellies full of love, and as muche as they lust: but they ever parted
with an appetite one from another, keeping all a longing desire to
devise howe to mete againe. Nowe when he had stablished suche a
continencie, and so kynde a framed honestie in mariage, he tooke no
lesse care to drive awaye all foolishe jealousie therein, thinking it
very good reason to beware there should be no violence, nor confusion
in mariage: and yet as reason would, they should suffer those which
were worthie to get children as it were in common, {Plato+} laughing
at the mad follie of them which revenge such things with warre and
bloudshed, as though in that case men in no wise should have no
fellowshippe together. Therefore a man was not to be blamed, being
stepped in yeres, and having a young wife, if seeing a fayer young man
that liked him, and knowen with all to be of a gentle nature, he
brought him to get his wife with childe, and afterwardes would avowe
it for his, as if him selfe had gotten it. It was lawfull also for an
honest man that loved another mans wife, for that he sawe her wise,
shamefast, and bringing forth goodly children, to intreate her husband
to suffer him to lye with her, and that he might also plowe in that
lustie grounde, and cast abroade the seede of well favored children:
which by this meanes came to be common in bloude and parentage, with
the most honorable and honestest persones. For first of all, Lycurgus
did not like that children should be private to any men, but that they
should be common to the commonweale: by which reason he would also,
that such as should become cittizens, should not be begotten of every
man, but of the most honestest men only. So Lycurgus thought also
there were many foolishe vaine toyes and fansies, in the lawes and
orders of other nations, touching mariage: seeing they caused their
bitches and mares to be limed and covered with the fayrest dogges and
goodliest stalons that might be gotten, praying or paying the masters
and owners of the same: and kept their wives notwithstanding shut up
safe under locke and key, for feare least other then them selves might
get them with childe, although they were sickely, feeble brayned, and
extreme olde. As if it were not first of all, and chiefly a
discommoditie to the fathers and mothers, and likewise to those that
bring them up, to have unperfect and feeble children borne, as it were
begotten of drie and withered men: and then to the contrarie, what
pleasure & benefit is it to those that have fayer & good children,
borne, as gotten of like seede and men. These things were done then by
naturall and civill reason, nevertheles they saye women were so farre
of then from intreatie, as ever they were before: so as in olde time,
in SPARTA, men knew not what adulterie ment. For proofe whereof, the
aunswer made by Geradas (one of the first auncien SPARTANS) unto a
straunger, maye be alledged: that asked him, what punishement they had
for adulterers. My friend, quoth he, there be none here. But if there
were? replied the straunger againe. Marye sayed he, then he must paye
as great a bull, as standing upon the toppe of the mountaine Taygetus,
maye drincke in the river of Eurotas. Yea marye: but howe is it
possible (quoth the straunger) to finde such a bull? Geradas laughing,
aunswered him againe. And howe were it possible also to finde an
adulterer in SPARTA? And this is that which is found of Lycugus lawes
touching mariages. Furthermore, after the birthe of every boy, the
father was no more master of him to bring him up after his will: but
he him selfe caried him to a certaine place called Lesche, where the
eldest men of his kinred being set, did viewe the childe. And if they
founde him fayer, and well proportioned of all his limmes, and
stronge: they gave order he should be brought up, and appointed him
one of the nine thousand partes of inheritaunce for his
education. Contrariwise, if they founde him deformed, misshapen, or
leane, or pale, they sent him to be throwen in a deepe pyt of water,
which they commonly called Apothetes, and as a man would saye, the
common house of office: holding opinion it was neither good for the
childe, nor yet for the common weale, that it should live considering
from his birthe he was not well made, not geven to be stronge,
healthful, nor lustie of bodie all his life longe. For this cause
therefore the nurce after their birthe did not washe them with water
simply (as they doe every where at that time) but with water mingled
with wine: and thereby did they proove, whether the complexion or
temperature of their bodies were good or ill. For they suppose, that
children which are geven to have the falling sickness or otherwise to
be full of rewmes and sick- nesses, cannot abide washing with wine,
but rather drye and pyne awaye: as contralilie the other which are
healthfull, become thereby the stronger and the lustier. The nurces
also of SPARTA use a certaine manner to bring up their children,
without swadling, or binding them up in clothes with swadling bandes,
or having on their heades any crosse clothes: so as they made them
nimbler of their limmes, better shaped & goodlier of bodie. Besides
that, they acquainted their children to all kinde of meates, and
brought them up without muche tendaunce, so as they were neither fine
nor licorous, nor fearefull to be lefte alone in the darcke, neither
were they criers, wrallers, or unhappy children, which be all tokens
of base and cowardly natures. {Eton+} So that there were straungers,
that of purpose bought nources out of LACONIA, to bring up their
children: as they saye Amycla was one of them, which nourced
Alcibiades. But Pericles his tutor, gave him afterwardes a bonde man
called Zopyrus, to be his master and governour: who had no better
propertie in him, then other common slaves. This did not Lycurgus. For
he did not put the education and government of the children of SPARTA,
into the handes of hyered masters or slaves bought with money: neither
was it lawful for the father him selfe to bring up his owne childe
after his owne manner and liking. For so soone as they came to seven
yeres of age, he tooke and divided them by companies, to make them to
be brought up together, and to accustome them to playe, to learne, and
to studie one with another. {Eton+} Then he chose out of every company
one, whom he thought to have the best wit, and had most courage in him
to fight: to whom he gave the charge and oversight of his owne
companies. The reste had their eyes waiting allwayes on him, they did
obey his commaundementes willingly, they did abide paciently all
corrections he gave them, they did suche taskes and worckes as he
appointed them: so that all their studie was most to learn to
obey. Furthermore, the olde grave headed men were present many times
to see them playe, and for the most parte they gave them occasions to
fall out, and to fight one with another, that they might thereby the
better knowe and discerne the naturall disposition of every on of
them, and whether they gave any signes or tokens in time to come to
become cowardes or valliant men. Touching learning, they had as muche
as served their turne: the reste of their time they spent in learning
howe to obey, to awaye with payne, to indure labour, to overcom still
in fight. {fortitude+} According to their groweth and yeres, they dyd
chaunge the exercises oftheir bodyes: they dyd shave their heads, they
went barelegged, they were constrained to playe naked together the
most parte of their time. After they were past twelve yeres of age,
they ware no lenger coates: and they gave them yerely but one seely
gowne. This was the cause they were alwayes so nasty and sluttishe,
and they never used to bathe or noynte them selves, saving only at
certaine dayes in the yere, when they were suffered to tast of this
refreshing. They laye and slept together upon beddes of straw, which
they them selves dyd make, of the toppes of reedes or canes that grewe
in the river of Eurotas: which they were forced to goe gather & breake
them selves with their handes, without any toole or iron at all. In
the winter, they dyd mingle thistle downe with these, which is called
Lycophonas, bicause that stuffe seemeth somewhat warme of it
selfe. About this time, the favorers and likers of this prety youthe,
which were commonly the lustiest and best posed youthes of the cittie,
beganne to be ofter in their companie: and then the olde men tooke the
better regarde unto them, and frequented more commonly the places of
their daylie exercises, and where their use was to fight together,
helping them when they played, how one should mocke another. This dyd
their olde men, not by waye of pastime only, but with suche care and
harty love towards them, as if they had bene altogether their fathers,
safters, and governours, while they were boyes: in so much as there
was never time nor place, where they had not alwayes some to
admonishe, reprove, or correct them, if they dyd a
faulte. Notwithstanding all this, there was ever one of the honestest
men of the cittie, who had expressely the charge and governaunce of
these boyes. He dyd divide them in companies, and afterwards gave the
oversight of them, to suche a one of the boyes as was discreetest, the
manliest, the most hardie, and of the best corage amongest them. They
called the children that were past infancie two yeres, Irenes: and the
greatest boyes Melirenes: as who would saye, ready to goe out of
boyerie. This boye who was made overseer of them, was commonly twenty
yeres of age. He was their captaine when they fought, and did
commaunde them as his servaunts when they were in the house: and
willed them which were strongest, and the most growen, to carie wodde
when they should prepare dinner or supper, and those which were least
and weakest, to goe gather erbes, which they must steale or lacke
them. So they went out to steale some in gardens, some at the markets,
other in the halles where the feastes were kept, and men did eate
together, into the which they conveyed them selves as closely and
cunningly as they could devise: for if they were taken with the
manner, they were scourged terriblie, bicause they were so grosse and
negligent, and not fine and cunning in their facultie. They stole also
all other kinde of meate, whatsoever they could get or laye hands
on. They pried and sought all occasions howe to take and steale meate
handsomely, bothe when men were a sleepe, or els that they were
careless or did not geve good hede unto them. But he that was taken
with the manner, had his payment roundely, and was punished with
fasting besides: for they had but a slender pittaunce, bicause
necessity should drive them to venter boldely, and wit should finde
out all the devises to steale finely. This was the chiefest cause, why
they gave them so small a diet. The seconde cause was, that their
bodies might growe up higher in height. For the vitall spirites not
being occupied to concoct and digest much meate, nor yet kept downe,
or spread abroade by the quantitie or overburden thereof, doe enlarge
them selves into lengthe, and shoote up for their lightnes: and for
this reason they thought the bodie did growe in height and lengthe,
having nothing to let, or hinder the rising of the same. It seemeth,
that the same selfe cause made them fayerer also. For the bodies that
are leane and slender, doe better & more easely yeld to nature, which
bringeth a better proportion and forme to every member: and
contrariwise it seemeth these grosse, corpulent, and overfedde bodies
doe encounter nature, and be not so nimble and pliant to her, by
reason of their heavy substaunce. As we see it by experience, the
children which women bring a litle before their time, and be somwhat
cast before they should have bene borne, be smaller and fayerer also,
and more pure commonly then other that goe their time: bicause the
matter whereof the bodie is formed, being more supple and pliant, is
the easelier welded by nature, which geveth them their shape and
forme. Touching the naturall cause of this effect, let us geve place
to other to dispute it that will, without our further deciding of the
same. But to returne to the matter of the LACEDAEMONIANS
children. They dyd robbe with so great care, and feare to be
discovered: that they tell of one, which having stolen a litle foxe,
dyd hyde him under his cloke, and suffered him with his teethe and
clawes to teare out all his bellie, and never cryed, for feare he
should have bene betrayed, un- till he fell downe dead in the place
where he stoode. This is not uncredible, by that we see younge boyes
doe abide at this daye: for we have seene divers, which have bidden
whipping even to death, upon the altar of Diana, surnamed Orthia. Nowe
this under master, who had the charge of every companie of these
boyes, used after supper (sitting yet at the table) to byd one of them
singe a songe: to another he put forth a question, who was to be well
advised of his aunswer, as for example: Who is the honestest man in
the cittie? or howe thinckest thou by that such a one dyd? By this
exercise they were enured from boyes state, to judge of things well or
ill done, and to understand the life and government of their
cittizens. For which of them dyd not aunswer quickly and directly to
these questions, who is a good man, who is an honest cittizen, and who
not: they thought it was a signe of a dulle wit, and careles nature,
nor geven to any vertue, for desire of honour and
estimation. Furthermore this under master was ever to waite for his
aunswer, and to see it should be brief and wellknyt up in wordes:
otherwise his punishement that aunswered crossely, or to litle
purpose, was that his mafter byt him by the thumbe. This he dyd many
times in the presence of the olde men and magistrates of the cittie,
that they might see whether he punished them with reason or not, &
according to their deserving. And though he dyd hurte him, they dyd
not by and by reprove him, but when the children were gone awaye, then
was he him selfe rebuked and punished, if he had corrected them to
sore, or contrairylie had favored to muche. Moreover they dyd ascribe
the good or ill opinion conceaved of the children, unto every of their
favorers, & lovers, which dyd affect & entertaine them: in asmuch as
they saye, a young boye upon a time fighting with another, and a crye
scaping out of his mouthe, his fainte cowardly harte dyd yelde, his
favorer LYVCRGVS and lover was straight condemned by the officers of
the cittie to a fine. Albeit this love was a thing even incorporated
into them, that the most honest and vertuousest women loved the young
maydes thus also: yet was there no jealousie nor suspition that grewe
hereof, but rather to the contratie, there grewe a marvelous mutuall
love and kyndnes betweene them, which loved in one selfe place. For
either of them by all the meanes they could, dyd devise howe to make
the childe they loved in common, the wisest, the gentlest, and the
best conditioned above all other. They taught these children to speake
in suche sorte, that their speache had ever in it a pleasaunt grace,
and in fewe wordes comprehended much matter. For Lycurgus ordained, a
great masse and weight of iron money, should be but litle worthe, and
of a small value, as we have tolde you before: and contrarihe, that
speache in fewe wordes, without any affectation, should holde much
deepe and grave matter, wherewith the children being acquainted, after
long silence, should be brief and pitthie in their aunswers. For as
the seede of incontinent men which are to busie with every ragge and
colman hedge, can take no roote to bringe forth fruite: even so
immoderate speache, full of wordes & busie tattle, bringeth forth as
litle sense. Hereof it commeth, that the aunswers of the LACONIANS
were so shorte and witty. As they saye, king Tgis aunswered on a daye
an ARHENIAN, who jesting at the swords the LACEDAEMONIANS dyd weare,
sayed they were so shorte, that these tumblers, and jugglers dyd
swallowe them downe in the sight of all the world: and yet sayed Agis,
we hurte our enemies with them for all that. For mine owne opinion, I
like well of the LACONIANS manner of speaking: which is not to speake
much, but when they speake, to touch the matter effectually, and to
make the hearers understand them. {PlainDealer+} I thincke also, that
Lycurgus, selfe, was shorte and quicke in his talke. For so a man maye
conjecture by his aunswers which are written: as that which he made to
one who earnestly prayed him to stablishe a popular state in
LACEDEMON, that the basest might have as great authoritie as the
highest. Beginne (quoth he) to doe it first in thine owne house. And
as that also which he aunswered another who asked him, why he had
appointed so small things, and so little of value to be offered to the
goddes?  Bicause (quoth he) we should never cease to honour them. And
as that which he spake another time, touching fightes & frayes, which
was: that he dyd never forbid his cittizens any of them, but those
wherein they use to geve their hande, as you would saye to yeld. Men
finde also suche like aunswers, in some of his letters written to his
cittizens, as when they asked him. Howe can we defende our selves
against our enemies? He aunswered: If ye be poore, and one doe covet
no more then another. And in another letter that was sent, where he
discourseth, whether it were requisite to inclose the cittie with
walles: he sayeth, can that cittie be without walles, which is
environned with men, though it be uncompassed with stone?  Nevertheles
it is harde to resolve, whether those letters, and other suche like
that are shewed, be to be beleeved, or discredited to be his. But that
long speache was much disliked, and reproved among the LACEDAEMONIANS,
it is manifestly to be seene by the words, which somme amongest them
have heretofore aunswered. As king Leonidas sayed one daye, to one
that discoursed with him many good things, but out of season: friend,
thou speakest many good wordes, but to litle purpose. And Charilaus,
nephew to Lycurgus, being asked why his uncle made so fewe lawes:
bicause sayed he, to men of fewe wordes, fewe lawes will serve. And
Archidamidas sayed this to somme, which reproved Hecataeus the Orator,
for that being bidden to supper at one of their feasts he spake not a
worde all supper time. He who can speake well, knoweth also when to
speak. And where I have tolde before, that in their feate and quicke
aunswers, commonly there was some prety grace, it maye be well seene
and knowen by these that followe. Demaratus aunswered a busie fellowe
who troubled him to much with vaine importunate questions asking
still: who was the honestest man of LACEDAEMON? Even he that is least
like thy selfe. And Agis sayed to somm which highely praysed the
ELIANS for their upright judgement, and just dealing in the games
Olympicall. What wonder make ye of it (quoth he) if in five yeres
space the ELIANS one daye doe good justice? And Theopompus likewise to
a straunger, who as desirous to shew his affection he bare the
LACEDAEMONIANS, told him how every bodye called him Philolacon (as to
saye) a lover of LACEDAEMON. It were more honestie for thee (sayed he
to be named Philopolites, a lover of her cittizens. And Plistonax the
sonne of Pausanias, when an Orator of ATHENS sayed the LACEDAEMONIANS
were unlearned, & ignorant: thou sayest true quoth he, for we only of
the GRECIANS have learned none of your ill conditions. And
Archidamidas, to one that demaunded of him, what number of fighting
men there might be of the SPARTANS: Enowe sayd he, to drive awaye the
wicked. We maye conjecture also their manner of speaking, by their
wordes in mirthe, which they spake sometimes playing wise: for they
dyd never use to speake vaine wordes at randome, but it had alwayes
some secret meaning in it, which required anothers good observation
that would finde it. As he which was desired to goe heare the
nightingall counterfeated naturally: I have (sayed he) heard the
nightingall it selfe. And another which having redde this inscription
upon a tumbe.  When as they had, well quenched tyrannie throughout
their lande, by worthie warlike power, Their happe was yet in wretched
wise to dye, by scalings Selynuntaes strongest tower. They well
deserved death, sayed he, that dyd but quench tyrannie: they should
have quite consumed it with fire. And one younger boye to another,
promising to geve him suche hardie cockes of the game, as should dye
in the place where they fought. O geve me not those (said he) which
will dye, but those which with fighting will kill others. Another
seeing men sitting in coches and litters as they went: god forbid
(said he) that I should ever sit in a chayer, where I could not rise
to my elders. Suche were their aunswers and encounters. So that somme
had reason which sayed heretofore, to speake LACONIAN like, was to be
philosopher like: as you would saye, more to exercise the minde, then
the bodye. Besides all this, they dyd studie to singe well, and to
make goodly ditties and songes. {cheer+} Then they spake most properly
and feately. There was in their songs also a certaine motion, I wote
not what, which stirred up the hearers hartes, and dyd kindle desire
in them to doe notable feates. Their tongue was plaine+, without
affectation+: their matter grave & morall, containing for the most
parte the prayse of those, which were slayne in battel for the defence
of their countrie as being happy men: and a shame to those that live,
which for fainte hartes refused so to dye, to leade a miserable and
unfortunate life. {Agincourt+} Or els they sange howe they were the
patternes for time to come, or the right glorie of the worlde, and the
true representation of vertuous men: as the songe would best become
their ages which dyd singe. It shall not be impertinent for the better
understanding hereof, to bring you here an example. For in their open
feasts, there were alwayes three daunces, ac- cording to the
difference of the three ages. The daunce of the old men, thus beganne
first for to singe. We have been young and stromg, yea valliant
heretofore, till crooked age did hold us backe, and bad us doe no
more. The young men followed after, singing: We yet are young, bolde,
strong, and ready to maintaine that quarell still, against all men
that doe on earthe remaine. The third was of children that came after
and sayed: And we doe hope as well, to passe you all at last, and that
the worlde shall witnes be, ere many yeres be past. To conclude, who
nerely will consider the worcks an makings of the LACON poets (wherof
some are yet extant) and will marke also the notes and tunes of the
pipe after the sound and measure whereof they marched in arraye, going
to charge the enemie: he shall finde, that Terpander, and Pindarus,
had reason to joyne hardynes with musicke. For Terpander speaking of
the LACEDAEMONIANS, sayeth in a place: This is that lande where deedes
of chevalrie, did florishe most, in many a martiall feate: Where
musicke made, her choise of harmonie, and justice kept her stately
royall seate. And Pindarus speaking of them also sayeth: There: grave
advise, is founde in aged braynes: there: gallant youthes, are lusty
ladds in dede. Which can both singe, and daunce, in courtlike traines:
yet dant their foes, with many a doughtie dede. By which testimonies
it appeareth, the one and the other made, and describeth them to have
loved musicke, and the warres together. For as another LACON poet
sayeth, It sitteth well, and is a semely thinge, for such as spend
their time in fesas of warre: To have the skyll, swete sonets for to
singe, and touche the harpe withouten jangling jarre. For this cause
therefore in all their warres, when they should geve battell, the King
dyd first sacrifice to the Muses, to put his souldiers in minde (as it
should seeme) of the discipline and wisdome of the Muses that they had
bene brought up in, to the end that when his souldiers were in the
most extreme daunger, the Muses should present them selves before the
souldiers eyes, to pricke them forward to doe some noble actes of
worthy memorie. In their time of warre, they dyd tollerate their young
men a litle of their hard and old accustomed life, and suffered them
then to trime their heares, to have brave armour, to weare gay
apparell, and tooke as great delight therein, to see them gallant, &
lustie, as to behold young neying and snorting horse, desirous for to
fight. And althoughe from the beginning of their youthe, they dyd use
to weare longe heares: yet were they never so carefull to combe &
brushe their heades, as when they should to the battell. For when they
dyd nointe them selves with sweete oyles, and dyd shed their heare,
remembring Lycurgus saying: who was wont to tell them, that heares to
them which were fayer, dyd make them more fayer, and to them that were
fowle, they made them more ougly and dredfull. The exercises also of
their bodies, were more easie and gentle, and not so hard and straight
in their warres, as they were in a peace: and generally, their whole
manner of life was not then so straightly viewed, nor yet
controlled. So as they only were the men of the world, to whom warres
were made a rest from labour, which men ordinarylie doe endure, to
make them the fitter for the warres. Afterwardes when their armie was
set in battell raye, even in the face of the enemie, the King dyd
straight sacrifice a goate unto the goddes, and forthwith commaunded
all his souldiers to put their garlands of flowers on their heades,
and willed that the pipes should sownd the songe of Castor: at the
noyse and tune whereof, he him selfe beganne first to marche
forward. So that it was a marvelous pleasure, and likewise a dredfull
sight to see the whole battell marche together in order, at the sound
of the pipes, and never to breake their pace, nor confounde their
ranckes, nor to be dismayde nor amazed themselves, but to goe on
quietly and joyfully at the sounde of these pipes, to hazard
themselves even to death. {bagpipes+} For it is likely, that such
corages are not troubled with much feare, nor yet overcome with much
furie: but rather they have an assured constancie and valliantnes in
good hope, as those which are backed with the assisting favour of the
goddes. The King marching in this order, had allwayes some about him,
which had before time wonne the prises in games and justes. And they
saye there was one of these on a time, that was offered a great some
of money at the games Olympicall, not to present him selfe at them:
but he refused it, liking better with great payne to winne the prise,
then for muche money to lose his honour. Whereupon one sayed unto him,
LACONIAN: and what hast thou gotten nowe, to carie away the prise with
so much swet? The LACONIAN aunswered him laughing: I shall fight in
the battel, sayeth he, before the King. When they had once broken into
their enemies, they dyd still fiercely and fiercelier set upon them, &
dyd never cease, untill their enemies gave waye and fled: and then
they chased and followed them still, untill such time as their
overthrowe and flight had assured them of the victorie. Then they
quickly & quiet- ly returned to their campe, judging it to be no
manhod, neither the parte of a noble minde, or of so worthye a
nationas the GRECIANSwere, to kill and hewe in peeces, men so
scattered and out of order, having forsaken all the hope of
victorie. This fell out not only honorable, but also very profitable
for them. For they which were in battell against them, knowing they
killed none but suche as resisted stowtely, and howe they dyd let
other goe which fled before them: they found it was more their benefit
to flye, then to tarie and abide the strokes. Hippias the sophister
sayeth, that Lyrurgus him selfe was a very good captaine, and a great
souldier, as he that had bene in many foughten fieldes: and
Philostephanus ascribeth to him the devise to put horsemen in troupes
and companies, which they called Oulames, whereof fiftie men at armes
was a troupe, whose manner was to put them selves in squadrons. But
Demetrius the Phalerian writeth otherwise, that Lycurgus was never at
the warres, & that he made all his lawes and government in a full
peace. But in my opinion, the intermission of warres during the playes
Olympicall, which they saye he devised, doeth shew in apparaunce that
he was a gentle natured man, and one that loved quietnes and
peace+. Some notwithstanding (amongest whom Hermippus was one) saye,
he was not with Iphitus at the first beginning when he ordeined the
playes Olympical, but that by chaunce he happened to come thither,
passing by in his jorney only, and that he stayed there to see the
game: where he thought he heard the voyce of a man behinde him,
saying, he marvelled much why he dyd not persuade his cittizens also
to be parteners of this newe devise: and turning backe to see who it
was that spake to him, he sawe no bodye. Whereupon he tooke a conceit
that it was a speache from the goddes: and went therefore presently to
seeke out Iphitus, with whom he made all the statutes and orders of
the feast, which afterwardes were farre more famous, better ordered,
and more stately then before. But to returne a gaine to the
LACEDAEMONIANS: their discipline & orde of life continued still, after
they were full growen men. For it was not lawfull for any man to live
as he listed, but they were within their cittie, as if they had bene
in a campe, where every man knoweth what allowance he hath to live
withall, and what busines he hath els to doe in his calling. To be
shorte, they were all of this minde, that they were not borne to serve
them selves, but to serve their countrie. {public_service+} Therfore
if they were commaunded nothing els, they went continually to see what
the children dyd, and to teache them somewhat which might profit the
common weale, or els they went to learne of those which were their
elders. For one of he best and happiest things which Lycurgus ever
brought into his cittie, was the great rest and leysure which he made
his cittizens to have, only forbidding them that they should not
professe any vile or base occupation: and they needed not also to be
carefull to get great riches, in a place where goodes were nothing
profitable nor esteemed. For the Ilotes, which were made bonde men by
the warres, dyd till their groundes, and yeelded them a certaine
revenue every yere. And as touching this matter, they tell of a
LACEDAEMONIAN, who being on a daye at ATHENS where the lawe was
pleaded, dyd understand that a cittizen there was condemned for
Idlenes, and howe he went home to his house very sorowfully,
accompanied with his friends which were sorie for him, and greatly
lamented his ill happe. The LACEDAEMONIAN then prayed those whic@were
about him, to shewe him the man condemned for living nobly, & like a
gentleman. I have alledged this, to shew how he thought it a vile and
servill thing to exercise any handy craft, or to worke any thing by
hande to get money. {trade+} For sutes in lawe, a man maye be well
assured they were banished with the golde and silver from LACEDAEMON,
considering now there was no more avarice nor covetousnes there, nor
yet povertie nor lacke, but equalitie with aboundaunce, and quiet life
with sobrietie. All other times but when they had warres, they
followed daunsing, feastes, playes, bankets, hunting, or other
exercises of bodye, and meetinges to passe the time away. For the
younge men untill they came to thirtie yeres of age, never went into
the market to buye any provision or things for the house, but dyd
their fathers or their friends busines: naye it was a shame for the
oldest men, to hawnte the market to often. As to the contrary, it was
honorable for them to be present at the shewe place the most parte of
the daye, where they diversely exercised their bodyes, and likewise to
be at the places of assembly, there to spend time with talking
together, & discoursing honestly one with another, without talking of
any matter of gaine, traffike, or money. For all their talke (for the
most parte) was about the praysing of some honest thing, or
sportingwise to reprove some dishonestie, which alwayes caried with it
some gentle lesson or monition by the waye. For Lycurgus was not such
a sower man, as they never sawe him laughe: but as Sosibius writeth,
it was he that first sacrificed to the litle god of laughture, which
is at LACEDAEMON, bicause he would mingle their feastes and assemblies
with mirthe, as a pleasaunt sawce to ease the trouble of their strickt
and harde life. To be brief, he did accustome his cittizens so, that
they neither would nor could live alone, but were in manner as men
incorporated one with another, {ring+} and were allwayes in company
together, as the bees be about their master bee: still in a continuall
love to serve their countries to winne honour, and to advaunce the
common weale. Which affection of theirs is playne and easely seene to
be imprinted in them by cer- ten of their aunswers, as in that which
Paedaretus sayed on a time, being left out of the election of the
number of the three hundred. Who departing home to his house mery and
jocond as might be, sayed: It did him good to see there were three
hundred founde better in the cittie than him selfe. Pisistratidas also
being sent ambassadour with certen other to the lieutenants of the
king of PERSIA, the PERSIAN lordes asked him, if they came of their
owne desire, or whether they were sent from the whole state: if we
obtaine, sayed he, it is from the state: if we be denied, then we come
of our selves. And Argileonida the mother of Brasidas, asked some that
went to visite her after they were returned home to LACEDAEMON from
their juorney to AMPHIPOLIS, if her sonne died like a man, and a
worthy SPARTAN. And they straight did commend him highely, saying:
there was not left in all LACEDAEMON suche a valliant man. She replied
unto them. Saye not so, my friends, I praye you: for Brasidas was in
dede a valliant man, but the country of LACONIA hath many moe yet
vallianter than he was. Now touching their Senate: Lycurgus was the
first that erected it among them. The first that were thereof, were
Lycurgus chief ayders and assisters of that erection, as we have
declared before: but afterwards he ordeined, that when any of those
first should happen to dye, they should choose in his place the most
honest reported man in the cittie, so he were three score yere olde
and above. This was the noblest glorie that could be among men, when a
man bare the bell and prise, not that he was swiftest among the swift,
nor strongest amongest the strong, but that he among the honest+ was
honestest. He had the reward of his vertue, as for libertie to speake,
soveraine authoritie to governe, and princely power over the common
weale, the honour, the life, and the goodes of the whole cittizens:
howbeit the election was made after this sorte. The people first
assembled in the market place, where there were some appointed and
shut up thereabout in a house, from whence they could neither see, nor
be seene of those that were assembled, but onely they might heare the
noyse which they made there. For the people by their crye and showte,
did declare whom they did choose, and whom they did refuse of the
competitours, as they used to shewe their liking by the like crye in
other things. The competitours were not brought in, and presented all
together, but one after another in order, as by lot did fall out. He
on whom the lot fell, passed through the middest of the assemblie of
the people, and sayed never a worde. The people straight that liked,
made a crye or showte alowde. The men appointed which were locked up,
had bookes or tables in which they wrote & noted the greatnes of the
crye, and showte the people made, as every competitour passed by, not
knowing nor seeing who he was. These hidden men did onely set downe in
their bookes, the first, the second, the thirde, and so many more, as
by showtes and cryes they perceyved dyd passe thus through the
assemblie. They noted also in their said bookes, which of these had
the greatest crye and showte of people at their passing thorough: &
him they came and declared to be Senatour chosen. Then he wearing a
garland of flowers on his head, went to all the temples of the goddes
in the cittie to geve thankes, having a great traine of young men
following, and praysing of his vertues. There went also with him a
marvelous company of women singing songes of his prayse, & howe
blessed he was, that he had lived so vertuously. Then every one of his
kinne prepared a bancket for him at home at their houses, and as he
entred the house, they sayed unto him: The cittie honoreth thee with
this bancket. That done, he repayred afterwards to the ordinarie place
of their eating, where he dyd in all things as he was accustomed,
saving he was served nowe at his table with a double allowaunce,
whereof he reserved the one. After supper, all his kinsewomen stoode
in the entrie of the hall where they had eaten: so he called her whom
he loved best, and gave her his allowaunce he had saved, and sayed to
her: This was geven me in token I was this daye rewarded for my
vertue: and even so I geve it thee for a like token of rewarde for thy
vertue. Then was she brought home by all the women there to her house,
even in like sorte as he was by the men. Touching burialles, Lycurgus
made a wise order: For first of all, to cut of all superstition of
burying places, he commaunded they should burie their dead within the
cittie, and that their graves should be round about their temples,
that young persones might have them allwayes in their eyes, and not be
affrayed to see a dead bodye, as if to touche a corse, or to passe by
their graves, it should defile a man. {death+} Then did he forbid them
to burie any thing with the corse, and willed they should only lappe
it up in a redde clothe, with olive leaves. It was not lawfull to
grave the name of any dead bodye upon his grave, but only of suche a
man as died in the warres, or of some holy woman professed into their
temple. Furthermore the time appointed to mourne in, was very
shorte. For it lasted not but a eleven dayes, and on the twelft daye,
they must doe sacrifice to Proserpina, and so leave of their
mourning. To conclude, he left nothing idle, or unworking in his
cittizens: for to all necessarie things which men can not lacke,
Lycurgus joyned ever a certaine emulation of men. As to desire vertue,
and to contemne vice: and furnished his cittie with many good
preceptes and examples, emong which his cittizens being still borne
and bred up, and having the same in every place before their eyes
where they went, they came to passe in time to be framed after the
very patterne and moulde of vertue it selfe. For this cause he did not
suffer any to travell out of the countrie, or to goe abroad as he
would, without speciall licence, for feare least those which travelled
abroad for their pleasure, should bring home straunge facions and
manners, and a corrupt disordered life, which by litle & litle might
get waye, and bring an alteration & chaunge of the whole
state. Furthermore, he kept out of SPARTA all straungers, except those
which had necessarie busines there, or were come thither for some
profit to the countrie: not that he was affrayed they should learne
some thing whereby to love vertue, or that they should desire to
followe his facion and manner of government as Thucydides was: but
rather fearing they should teache his cittizens some naughty manners,
or some ill favored vice. For it must needes be, that straungers bring
ever straunge and newe devises with them: which newe devises bring
with them also newe opinions: and newe opinions beget newe affections
and mindes, that many times are repugnant to the lawe, and to the
forme of the common weale established before, as discordes doe many
times in an harmonie of musicke, that before agreed very well
together. Therefore he judged it a thing most necessarie, to keepe his
cittie free and safe from counterfeating of any straungers manners or
facions, that were commonly as persones infected with some contagious
sicknes. Nowe in all we have spoken before, even to this place, there
is no manner of token or shewe of injustice, or lacke of equitie,
wherewith some seme to burden Lycurgus in his lawes: by saying they
were well made, to make men warlicke and valliant, but not to be juste
or righteous. But concerning the lawe they call Cryptia, as much to
saye, as their secret: if it were of Lycurgus institution, as
Aristotle sayeth, it might have caried Plato into the like opinion
that Lycurgus had of his common weale. This was the lawe: The
governours which had the charge and oversight of the young men, at
certaine appointed times, dyd chuse out those they thought to have the
best discretion, and sent them abroade into the countrie, some one
waye, some another waye, who caried with them daggers, and some
provision to feede them. These young men being thus dispersed abroade
in the countrie, did hide them selves all the daye close in secret
places, and there they laye and tooke their rest: afterwardes when
night was come, they went to seeke out the high wayes, and killed the
first of the ILOTES that they met. Sometimes even in the broade daye,
they went into the countrie to kill the strongest and stowtest of
them: as Thucydides telleth in his history of the warres of
PELOPONNESVS, where he sayeth. That a certaine convenient number of
the ILOTES were crowned, by a publicke proclamation of the SPARTANS:
and being insfranchesed, for their good services they had done the
common weale, they were caried to all the temples of the goddes for an
honour. Within a while after, no man knewe what was become of them,
being about two thousand in number: so that never man heard tell
neither then nor since, howe they came to their deathes. Howbeit
Aristotle above all others sayeth, that the Ephores, so soone as they
were placed in their offices, made warres with the ILOTES, bicause
they might lawfully kill them. And it is true, that in other things
they did handle them very hardely. For they forced them somtimes to
drincke wine without water out of measure, till they had made them
starke drunke. Then they brought them all into their common halles
where they did eate, to make their children to beholde them, & to see
what beastlines it was for aman to be drunke. Likewise they made them
singe songes, & daunce daunces, unfit for honest men, and suche as
were full of derision and mockerie, and did forbid them expressely to
singe any honest songes. So it is reported, that in the jorney the
THEBANS made to LACONIA, many of the ILOTES were taken prisoners
thereat, and when they were commaunded to singe the verses of
Terpander, or of Alcman, or of Spendon the Laconian, they would not
doe it: sayingg they durst not singe them for their masters. Wherefore
he that first sayed in the countrie of LACEDAEMONIA, he that is free
is more free, and he that is bonde, is more bonde then in other
places: knewe very well the divetsitie betweene the libertie and
bondage there, and the libertie and bondage of other countries. But in
my opinion, the LACEDAEMONIANs beganne to use these great outrages and
cruelties, long time after the death of Lyrurgus, and specially since
the great earthquake that happened at SPARTA, at which time the ILOTES
rose against them with the MESSENIANS, and did great mischief through
the countries and put the cittie to the greatest distresse and daunger
that ever it had. For I cannot be persuaded, that ever Lycurgus
invented, or instituted, so wicked & mischievous an acte, as that
kynde of ordinaunce was: bicause I imagine his nature was gentle and
mercifull, by the clemencie and justice wee see he used in all his
other doings, and was witnessed besides by open oracle from the
goddes, for a just and wise man. Furthermore, they saye of him, that
when he sawe the chiefest pointes of his government had taken deepe
roote, and that the forme of his common weale went on, and was strong
enough to mainteine & keepe it selfe a foote, like as Plato sayeth,
that God rejoyced greately after he had made the worlde, and sawe the
same turne and move his first moving: even so Lycurgus taking singular
pleasure and delight in his minde, to see his notable lawes put in
use, and so well stablished and liked of by experience, sought yet to
make them immortall, as neere as he could possible, by any forecast of
man, that no after time whatsoever, might chaunge or put them
downe. To bring this to passe, he caused all the people to assemble,
and tolde them he thought his civill policie and state of common weale
was already sufficiently established, for vertuous and happy life: yet
there was one matter behinde of greater importaunce than all the rest,
which he could not yet declare unto them, untill he had first asked
counsell of the oracle of Apollo. And therefore in the meane time they
should keepe and observe his lawes & ordinaunces inviolablie, without
chaunging, removing, or staying any matter therein, until he were
returned from the cittie of DELPHES, and then they should doe that
other thing behinde, if the God then so counselled him. They all
promised him to doe it, and prayed him to make hast to goe on his
jorney. But before he departed, he made the Kings and Senatours sweare
first, and consequently all the people after, that they would keepe
his lawes & ordinaunces without chaunging or altering any thing,
untill he did returne againe. This done, he went to the cittie of
DELPHES, where so sone as he arrived, he sacrificed in the temple to
Apollo, and asked him: If the lawes he had made were good to make a
man an happy life. Apollo made him aunswer, his lawes were very good,
and that his cittie keping them, should be the most renowmed of the
worlde. Lycurgus caused this oracle to be written, which he sent to
SPARTA. After he sacrificed to Apollo againe: and then taking leave of
his friendes, and of his sonne, he determined to dye, bicause his
cittizens should never be released of the othe they had made betweene
his handes. When he had this determination, he was come to the age,
wherein a man hathe strength enough to live lenger: and yet was olde
enough also to dye if he would. Wherefore finding him selfe happy to
have obteined his desire, he willingly pyned him selfe to death, by
abstinence, and lacke of meate. For he thought it meete, that the very
death+ of great personages should bring benefit ever to the common
weale, and that the ende of their life should be no more idle, or
unprofitable, then the rest of their life before: that it was one of
their most meritorious actes, to have their death extolled for
worthines. So he imagined that his death would be the perfection and
crowne of his felicitie, after he had made & ordeined so many good &
notable lawes, for the honour & benefit of his countrie: & should be
as a seale of confirmation of his lawe, & the continual preservitour
of his cittie, considering all his cittizens had sworne to keepe them
all inviolably, untill he were returned. He was not deceaved of his
hope, for his cittie was the chiefest of the worlde, in glorie &
honour of government, by the space of five hundred yeres. For so long
his cittie kept his lawes without any chaunge or alteration by any of
the Kings successours, untill king Agis, the sonne of Archidamus
beganne to reigne. For the creation of the Ephores, did not breake,
nor discontinewe any of the lawes of Lycurgus, but reduced them rather
to a more straight and strickt order: although it seemed at the first
that the Ephores were ordeined, for the maintenaunce and defence of
the libertie of the people, whereas in deede they did also strengthen
the authoritie of the Kings & Senate. Nowe in the raigne of king Agis,
gold and silver beganne first to creepe in againe to the cittie of
SPARTA, by meanes of Lysander. With money there came in straight
covetousness and gredines to get and gather. {trade+} And although
Lysander was not desirous to get it, nor would be corrupted for any
money: yet he brought riches and covetousnes into the countrie, and
filled the same with all finenes, by bringing in great store of golde
and silver from'the warres, directly against the lawes and ordinaunces
of Lycurgus. The which so long as they were in force and use, it
appered that the government of SPARRA seemed not to be a pollicy or
common weale, but rather a certaine holy place and order of
religion. And even as the Poets fayne, that Hercules went through the
world with his clubbe, and lyons skynne, punishing cruel robbers and
unnaturall tyrannes: so in like case with a litle scrowe of
parchement, and a poore cape, did the SPARTANS commaund and geve
lawes, to all the rest of GRECE, even with their good liking and
consent. And they chased the tyrannes awaye, which usurped tyrannical
power over any of their citties, and did decide all controversies, and
oftentimes pacified their seditions, without sending out one souldier,
but only a simple poore ambassadour. At whose commaundement the people
presently assembled like the bees, which gather together about their
King, so soone as they spye him: they did then so greatly reverence
the good government & justice of the SPARTANS. Therefore I can but
wonder much at those which saye, the cittie of LACEDAEMON could obey
well, but not commaunde: & for proofe they alleage wordes of king
Theopompus, who aunswered one which sayd, that SPARTA was mainteined,
bicause the Kings could conimaund well. Naye the rather (sayd he)
bicause the cittizens can obey well. For men commonly disdaine to obey
those, which are not wise in commaunding. So that the faithfull
obedience of the subjectes, dependeth much upon the sufficient
commaundement of the wise prince. For he that directeth well, must
needes be well obeyed. For like as the arte of a good rider, is to
make his horse gentle, & ready at commaundement: even so the chiefest
pointe belonging to a prince, is to teach his subjects to
obey. Wherefore the LACEDAEMONIANS procured, that not onely other
people did willingly obey them, but also desired to be ruled, &
commaunded by them. For they asked them, neither shippes nor money,
nor yet did send them any number of men of warre to compell them, but
onely they sent one cittizen of SPARTA to governe them, to whom all
the other people submitted them selves, and were holpen by him in
their necessitie, as fearing and reverencing him. In this wise the
SICILIANS were holpen by Gysippus, the CHALCIDIANS by Brasidas, and
all the GRECIANS inhabiting ASIA, by Lysander, Callicratidas, and by
Agesilaus, who were called the reformers and directors of princes,
peoples, & Kings, unto whom they were sent here and there: but ever
they had their eye upon the cittie of SPARTA, as upon the most perfect
Patterne to order mans life by, and to governe a common weale
after. To this effect tended the mery worde spoken in jest by
Stratonicus: Who said he did order the ATHENIANS to tend their
sacrifices, and the ELIANS to tende their games: and if they made any
faulte therein, the LACEDAEMONIANS should be well whipped. That was
merely spoken, and in a jesdng manner. But Antisthenes (the
philosopher and one of Socrates scholers) seeing the THEBANS growen
very hawtie and glorious, after that they had conquered the
LACEDAEMONIANS in the jorney of LEVCTRES: me thinketh sayed he, these
THEBANS here doe like the schoole boyes, which bragge and rejoyce when
they have a litle beaten their master. But this was not Lycurgus
meaning, to have his cittie to commaunde many. But he thought the
felicitie of a cittie, as of a private man, consisted chiefly in the
exercise of vertue and in the unitie of the inhabitants thereof. He
framed his common wealth to this ende, that his cittizens should be
nobly minded, content with their owne, and temperate in their doings,
that thereby they might mainteine and keepe them selves long in
safetie. The self same intention had Plato, Diogenes, and Zenon, in
setting forth their bookes, which they wrote of the government of
common weales: and so had likewise many other great and learned men
which have written of the same matter. Howbeit they only left behinde
them, wordes, and written bookes: but Lycurgus contrariwise, left no
written bookes nor pamplets, but stablished and left behind him, a
royall forme of government, which no man ever before had invented, nor
never after could be followed He hath made them plainely see, a whole
cittie live to gether, and governe it selfe philosophically, according
to the true rules & preceptes of perfect wisdome: which imagined, that
true wisedome was a thing hanging in the ayer, and could not visiblie
be scene in the worlde. Whereby he hath worthily excelled in glorie
all those which ever tooke upon them to write or stablishe the
government of a common weale. And therefore sayeth Aristotle, that
after his death they did him lesse honour in LACEDAEMONIA, then he had
deserved: albeit they did him all the honour they possibly could
devise. And yet they buylt a temple for him, and made solemne
sacrifice to him every yere, as unto a god. More, they saye, that when
the ashes of his bodie were brought to SPARTA, there fell straight
lightning upon his tumbe where they were put: which they had not often
seene to happen, to other men of name after their decease, saving only
to the poet Euripides, who dying in MACEDONIA, was buried neere the
cittie of ARETHVSA. The which is some manifest argument, for suche as
love the Poet, to laye against those which somewhat deprave him, seing
this signe came to him after his death, which had happened before to a
most well beloved man of the goddes. Some saye Lycurgus died in the
cittie of CIRRHA. But Apollothemis sayeth, he died in ELIDA. Timaus
and Aristoxenus write, he ended his dayes in CRETA. And Aristoxenus
sayeth further, that those of the Ile of CRETA doe shewe his grave in
the place which they call Pergamia, by the broade highe wayes side. He
left one onely begotten sonne named Antiorus, who died without issue,
so that his house and name fayled with him. But his neere kinsemen and
famillier friendes, did set up a company or brotherhood in memorie of
him, which continued a long time: and the dayes wherein they
assembled, were called the Lycurgides. There is another Aristocrates
(the sonne of Hipparchus) who sayeth, that he being dead in CRETA, his
friends burned his bodie, and afterwardes threwe his ashes into the
sea, according as he had prayed and requested them. For he feared,
that if any parte of him should at any time have bene brought to
SPARTA, the inhabitans would have sayed he was returned againe, and
thereby would have thought them selves discharged of their othe, and
might have lawfully altered the lawes which he had appointed. And this
is the discourse and ende of Lycurgus life. The ende of Lycurgus life.

The Life of Numa Pompilius+

THE Historiographers differ marvelously of the time, in which Numa
Pompilius raigned King, albeit some will derive from him many noble
houses descended in ROME. For one Clodius, who wrote the booke
intituled the table of time, affirmeth that the auncient registers of
the cittie of ROME were lost when it was taken and sacked by the
GAVLES: and that those which are extant at this daye be not true, but
were only made by men desirous to gratifie some, which have thrust in
auncient houses & families of the first ROMAINES, that concerne
nothing them whom they ment to represent. On the other side, although
the common opinion be, that Numa was a familier friend and schollet of
Pythagoras the philosopher, yet some saye he was never learned, nor
had any knowledge at all in the Greeke tongue. And yet maintaining
that it is possible enough, that he was so well borne, and had suche
perfection in all kind of vertue, that he never neded any master: and
though he had neded, they had rather attribute the honour of the
inducting of this King unto some other foreane person, that was more
excellent then Pythagoras. Other saye, that Pythagoras the philosopher
was long time after the raigne of Numa, and well nighe five ages after
him. Howbeit other saye, there was another Pythagoras borne in SPARTA
(who having wonne the pryse of running at the games Olympicall, in the
sixten@h Olympiade, & the third yere of Numaes raigne) did come into
ITALIE, where he kept much about Numa, and did assist and helpe him in
the governing & ordering of his Realme. By meanes whereof there be
many customes yet of the LACONIANS, mingled with the ROMAINES, which
this second Pythagoras was sayed to have taught him. Nevertheles it is
not confessed that Numa was borne of the SABYNES, which they saye are
descended from the LACEDAEMONIANS. So it falleth out very hard to
agree certainly of the time when Numa was, and chiefly for suche as
will followe the rolle or table of those which from Olympiades to
Olympiades have wonne the pryses of games Olympicall: considering the
rolle or table that they have at this present, was very lately
published by one Hippias an Elian, who delivereth no reason or
argument of necessitie why it should be taken for an undoubted trothe,
which he in that sorte hath gathered. Yet we will not leave to put in
writing those things worthie of memorie, which we could gather by any
meanes of king Numa, beginning at that place which we thought to be
meetest. It was nowe sithence ROME was buylt, seven & thirtie yeres
(for so long time raigned Romulus) when Romulus the fifte of the
moneth of July (which they call the Nones of the goates) made a
solemne sacrifice without the cittie, neere to a certaine place
commonly called, the goate marshe. As all the whole Senate, with the
most parte of the people were present at this sacrifice, sodainely
there rose in the ayer a very great tempest, and a marvelous darcke
thicke clowde, which fell on the earthe with suche boysterous windes,
stormes, lightnings, and thunder: that the poore common people being
affrayed of so sore a tempest, dispersed them selves sodainely,
running here and there for succour, and therewithall king Romulus
vanished awaye in suche sorte, that he was never after seene alive nor
dead. This brought the Senatours, and noble men whom they called
Patricians, into great suspition. And there ranne a fowle tale among
the common people, howe they had a long time borne very impaciently to
be subjects to a King, bicause them selves would have had and taken
upon them some soveraine authoritie, and that for this cause they had
killed king Romulus. Adding somewhat more unto it, howe a litle before
he had used them more roughely, and commaunded them more straightly
then he was wont or accustomed. Nevertheles they found the meanes to
quenche all these bruites and murmurings, by doing divine honour and
sacrifice unto him, as one not dead, but passed to a better life. To
confirme this, one of the noblest men among them called Proclus came
in, and by othe affirmed before all the people, that he sawe Romulus
ascending up into heaven, armed at all peces, and that he heard a
voyce saye: from thenceforth call him Quirinus. This being thus
appeased, there sprange up another trouble, to knowe whom they should
choose in his place. For the straungers which were come then from
otherplaces to dwell in ROME, were not yet throughly joyned to the
naturall borne ROMAINES: in so muche, as the common people dyd not
only waver, and stagger up and down in opinion, but the Senatours also
(that were many and of divers nations) did enter into a suspition one
of another. These things notwithstanding they all agreed in this, that
of necessstie they must choose a King: howbeit in the rest they
differed much, not only whom they should choose, but also of what
nation he should be. For those which were the first founders and
buylders of the Cittie of ROME with Romulus, could in no wise abide,
nor suffer, that the SABYNES (to whom they had divided parte of their
landes, and a moytie of their circle) should attempt and presume to
commaund them, whom they dyd receyve and associate into their company
& fellowshippe. The SABYNES alledged on thother side for them, a good
reason, and such as caried great probabilitie. Whi chwas, that never
sence the death of their king Tatius, they neither had in any thing
disobeyed nor disquieted king Romulus, but had suffered him to raigne
peaceably: and therefore Romulus being nowe deceased, reason would
that the newe King should be chosen of their nation. And that albeit
the ROMAINES had receyved them into their cittie, they could not say
therefore, that in time of this association, they were lesse to be
reckoned of in any thing, than them selves. Further they added, that
in joyning with them, the ROMAINES had doubly increased their might
and power, and had made a bodie of a people, which deserved the honour
and title of a cittie. These were the causes of their contention. But
to prevent that of this contention there might growe no confusion in
the cittie, if it should remaine without an head to commaund: the
Senatours which were a hundred and fiftie in number, gave counsell
that every one of them by turnes, one after another, should carie the
royall state of the King, and all the showes and ornaments of his
maiesfie, and should doe the ordinarie sacrifices of the King, and
dispatche all causes sixe howers in the daye, and sixe howers in the
night, as the King be- fore had used. Thus they thought it best to
devide_the_rule+, that one might have asmuch power as the other, as
well in respect of them selves, as also for regarde of the people. For
they imagined, that the chaunging and removing thus of this regall
dignitie, and passing it from man to man, would clene take awaye envie
amonly them, and make every of them to rule temperately, and uprightly
see, that in one, & the selfe same daye and night, every of them
should be a King and private persone also. The ROMAINES call this
manner of regiment in vacation, Interregnum: as you would saye, rule
for the time. Nowe albeit their government was very modest and civill,
yet they could not for all that keepe them selves from falling into
the suspition, and slaunder of the people: who gave it out straight,
that this was a fine devise of theirs, to chaunge by this meanes the
rule of the Realme into a fewe noble mens handes, to the ende that the
whole authoritie and government of all publicke causes, should remaine
still in them selves, bicause it grieved them to be subject to a
King. And in the ende, the two partes of the cittie came to this
agreement: that the one parte should choose one of the bodie of the
other, to be the King. This course they liked very well, aswell for
the pacification of present sturre and dissention amongest them
selves, as for procuring equalitie of affection, and sturring up a
likenes of goodwill in the King that thus indifferently should be
chosen: whereby he should love the one parte for that they had chosen
him, and likewise the other parte for that he was of their nation. The
SABYNES were the first, which referred the election to the ROMAINES
choyse: & the ROMAINES thought it better to chuse one of the nation of
the SABYNFS, then to have a ROMAINE chosen by the SABYNES. After they
had consulted, they determined amongest them selves: & did choose Numa
Pompilius one of the bodye of the SABYNES to be King, who was none of
the number of them which came to dwell at ROME, howbeit he was a man
so famous for his vertue, that the SABYNES so soone as they named him,
did receyve him more willingly, then they who had chosen him. After
they had thus published their election, the first and chiefest
persones of the one and the other side, were chosen out to goe unto
him. Now Numa Pompilius was borne in one of the chiefest and best
citties which the SABYNES had, called Cures, whereupon the ROMAINES,
and their fellowes the SABYNFS, were called afterwardes Quirites, and
he was the sonne of Pomponius a noble man, the youngest of foure
brethern: being by the secret worcking of the goddes, borne on the
very daye, on the which ROME was first founded by Romulus, which was
the one and twenty daye of Aprill. This man being naturally geven and
inclined unto all vertue, did yet increase the same, by studie, and
all kynde of good discipline+: and by the exercise thereof, and of
true pacience, and right philosophie+, he did marvelously adorne him
selfe and his manners. For he did not only clere his soule, and minde,
of all passions+ and vices commonly used in the worlde: but he
conquered in him selfe all heates, violence, and covetousness. And
would neither seeke nor usurpe, that which was an other mans, a thing
at that time honoured among the most barbarous people: but thought
that to be the true, and right victorie in man, first to conquer and
commaund him selfe by judgement and reason, & then to subdue all
covetousnes & greedines. {king_over_self+} Having therfore this
opinion, he would in no wise have in his house any superfluity or
finenes. {PlainDealer+} He became to every man that would employe him
(aswell straunger as his owne countrie man) a wise counsaillour, and
an upright judge. He bestowed his leysure, not to followe his owne
delight, or to gather goods together: but to serve the goddes, & to
behold their celestiall nature and power, as much as mans reason and
understanding could comprehend. Thereby he got so great a name &
reputation, that Tatius (which was king of ROME with Romulus) having
but one onely daughter called Tatia, made him his sonne in
law. Howbeit this mariage put him in no such jolity, that he would
dwel at ROME with his father in lawe, but rather kept at home at his
own house in the countrie of the SABYNES, there to serve and cherishe
his olde father with his wife Tatia: who for her parte also liked
better, to live quietly with her husband being a private man, then to
goe to ROME where she might have lived in much honour and glorie, by
meanes of the King her father. She died as it is reported, 13 yeres
after she was maried. After her deathe, Numa leaving to dwell in the
cittie, was better contented to live in the country alone, and
solitarie, and gave him self to walke much in the fields and woddes
consecrated to the godds, as one desirous to leade alone life, farre
from the companie of men. Wherupon was raised (in my opinion) that
which is spoken of him, and of the goddesse Egeria. That it was not
for any straungenes, or melancholines of nature, that Numa withdrew
him self from the conversation & company of men, but bicause he had
found another more honorable and holy society of the Nymphe, and
goddesse Egeria, who had done him, as they saye, that honour, as to
make him her husband: with whom as his beloved darling it is syed he
enjoyed happy dayes, and by dayly frequenting of her company, he was
inspired with the love and knowledge of all celestiall things. Surely,
these devises are much unto certain old fables of the Phryggians,
which they having learned from the father to the sonne, doe love to
tell of one Atis: of the Bithynians, of one Herodotus: of the
ARCADIANS of one Endymion+: and of many other such like men, who in
their lives were taken for sayntes, and beloved of the
goddes. Notwith- standing, it is likely, that the goddes love neither
birdes, nor horse, but men, and have sometimes a liking to be
familliar with perfect good men, and doe not disdaine sometime the
conversation of suche as be holye, religious, and devoute. But to
beleeve the goddes have carnall knowledge, and doe delight in the
outward beawtie of creatures, that seemeth to carie a very harde
beliefe. Yet the wise EGYPTIANS thincke it probable enough & likely,
that the spirite of the goddes hath geven originall of generation to
women, and doe beget fruite of their bodies: howbeit they holde that a
man can have no corporall companie with any divine nature. Wherein
they doe not consider, that every thing that joyneth together, doth
deliver againe a like substaunce, to that wherewith it was
joyned. This notwithstanding, it is mete we should beleeve the godds
beare good will to men, and that of it doth spring their love, whereby
men saye the goddes love those whose manners they purifie, and inspire
with vertue. And they doe not offende, which fayne that Phorbas,
Hyacinthus and Admetus, were sometimes the lovers of Apollo, and also
Hippolytus the SICYONIAN: of whom they reporte, that ever when he
passed over the arme of the sea which lieth betweene the citties of
SICYONA, ,and of CIRRHA, the god which knewe he came, rejoyced, &
caused Pythia the prophetesse to pronounce these heroycall verses, I
knowe full well, my deare Hyppolytus, returnes by sea, my mind
duvineth thus. It is sayd also that Pan was in love with Pindarus and
his verses, and that the goddes honored the poets Hesiodus, and
Archilocus, after their death by the Muses. They saye moreover, that
AEsculapius laye with Sophocles in his life time, and at this daye
they doe yet showe many tokens thereof: and after his death, another
god (as it is re- ported) made him to be honorably buried. Nowe if
they graunte, that such things maye be true: how can we refuse to
beleeve, that some goddes have bene familliar with Zaleucus, Minos,
Zoroastres, Lycurgus, Numa, & such other like personages, which have
governed kingdomes, and stablished common weales? and it is not unlike
that the goddes in deede dyd company with them, to inspire and teache
them many notable things, and that they did drawe neere unto these
Poets, and players of the harpe, that made and played many dolefull
and joyfull ditties, at the least for their sporte and pleasure onely,
if ever they came neere them. Nevertheles if any man be of other
opinion, the waye is open and large as Bacchylides sayed, to thincke
and saye as he lust. For my selfe I doe finde, that which is written
of Lycurgus, Numa, and other suche persones, not to be without
likelyhood and probabilitie: who having to governe rude, churlishe,
and stiffe necked people, & purposing to bring in straunge novelties
into the governments of their countries, did fayne wisely to have
conference with the godds, considering this fayning fell to be
profitable and beneficiall to those them selves, whom they made to
beleeve the same. But to returne to our historie. Numa was fourty
yeres olde, when the ambassadours of ROME were sent to present the
Kingdome unto him, and to intreate him to accept thereof. Procltus, &
Velesus, were the ambassadours that were sent. One of the which the
people looked should have bene chosen for King, bicause those of
Romulus side, did favour muche Proclus: and those of Tatius parte
favored Velesus. Nowe they used no long speache unto him, bicause they
thought he would have bene glad of suche a great good fortune. But
contrarely it was in deede a very hard thing, and required great
persuasions, and much intreatie, to move a man which had allwayes
lived quietly, and at ease, to accept the regiment of a cittie, which
as a man would saye, had bene raysed up & growen by warres, and
martiall dedes. Wherfore he aunswered them in the presence of his
father, and one other of his kinsemen called Martius in this
sorte. Chaunge & alteration of mans life is ever daungerous: but for
him that lacketh nothing necessarie, nor hath cause to complaine of
his present state, it is a great follie to leave his olde acquainted
trade of life, and to enter into another newe and unknowen, if there
were no other but this only respect: that he leaveth a certaintie, to
venter upon an uncertainty. Howbeit there is further matter in this,
that the daungers and perills of this kingdom which they offer me, are
not altogether uncertain, if we wil looke backe what happened unto
Romulus. Who was not unsuspected to have layed waite, to have had
Tatius his fellow and companion murdered: and now after Romulus death,
the Senatours selves are mistrusted to have killed him on the other
side by treason. And yet they saye it, and singe it every where: that
Romulus was the sonne of a god, that at his birthe he was miraculously
preserved, and after-wardes he was as incrediblie brought up. Whereas
for my owne parte, I doe confesse, I was begotten by a mortall man,
and was fostered, brought up, and taught by men as you know: and these
fewe qualities which they prayse and commend in me, are conditions
farre unmete for a man that is to raigne. I ever loved a
solitarie_life+, quiet and studie, and did exempt my selfe from
worldly causes. All my life time I have sought and loved peace above
all things, and never had to doe with any warres. My conversation hath
bene to companie with men which meete only to serve and honour the
goddes, or to laughe and be merie one with another, or els to spende
their time in their private affayers, or otherwise sometime to attend
their pastures, and feeding of their cattell. Whereas Romulus (my
ROMAINE lordes) hath left you many warres begonne, which peradventure
you could be contented to spare: yet now to mainteine the same, your
citie had neede of a martiall King, active, & strong of bodye. Your
people moreover, through long custome, and the great increase they are
geven unto by feates of armes, desire nought els perhappes but warres:
and it is plainely seene, they seeke still to growe, and commaund
their neighbours. So that if there were no other consideration in it,
yet were it a mere mockerie for me, to goe to teache a cittie at this
present to serve the goddes, to love justice, to hate warres, and to
flye violence: when it rather hath neede of a conquering captaine,
then of a peaceable+ King. These and suche other like reasons and
persuasions Numa alleaged, to discharge him selfe of the Kingdome
which they offred him. Howbeit the ambassadours of the ROMAINES most
humbly besought and prayed him with all instance possible, that he
would not be the cause of another newe sturre, and commotion among
them, seeing both partes in the cittie have geven their consent and
liking to him alone, and none other to be their King. Moreover, when
the ambassadours had left him upon this sute, his father, and Martius
his kinseman, beganne also privately to perswade him, that he should
not refuse so good and godly an offer. And albeit he was contented
with his present state, and desired to be no richer than he was, nor
coveted no princely honour nor glorie, bicause he sought only most
famous vertue: yet he must needes thincke, that to rule well, was to
doe the goddes good service, whose will it was to employe the justice
they knewe in him, and not to suffer it to be idle. Refuse not
therefore (quoth they) this royall dignitie, which to a grave and wise
man is a goodly field, to bring forth many commendable workes and
fruites. There you maye doe noble service to the godds to humble the
heartes of these martiall people, and to bring them to be holy and
religi- ous: for they readely turne, and easely conforme them selves
unto the nature of their prince. They dearely loved Tatius, although
he was a straunger: they have consecrated a memorie to Romulus with
divine honours, which they make unto him at this daye. And it maye be,
that the people seeing them selves conquerers, will be full enough of
warres: and the ROMAINES being nowe full of spoyles and triumphes,
will be glad to have a gentle prince, and one that loveth justice,
that they maye thenceforth live in peace, under good and holy
lawes. And yet if it be otherwise, that their hartes be still full of
heate and furie to fight: is it not better to turne this their desire
to make warres some other waye, when a man hathe the bridle in his
owne handes to doe it, and to be a meane in the meane time to joyne
the countries and all the nation of the SABYNES, in perpetual love and
amitie, with so mighty and florishing a cittie?  besides all these
persuasions and reasons, there were many signes also (as they saye)
which promised him good lucke, together with the earnest affection and
liking of his owne countrie cittizens. Who, so soone as they
understoode the coming, and commission of the ambassadours of ROME,
they importunately desired him to goe thither, and to accept the offer
of the Kingdome: that he might more straightly unite and incorporate
them together with the ROMAINES. Whereupon, Numa accepted the
Kingdome. Then after he had done sacrifice to the goddes, he set
forwardes on his journey towardes ROME: where the people and Senate
went out to meete him, with a wonderful desire to see him. The women
at his entrie, went blessing of him, and singing of his prayses. They
dyd sacrifice for him, in all the temples of the goddes. There was
neither man nor woman but seemed to be as joyfull and glad: as if a
newe Realme, and not a newe Kinge, had bene come to the cittie OF
ROME. Thus was he brought with this open joye, and rejoycing, unto the
market place, where one of the Senatours, which at that time was
regent, called Spurius Vettius, made them pronounce his open election:
and so by one consent he was chosen King, with all the voyces of the
people. Then were brought unto him the tokens of honour and dignitie
of the King. But he him selfe commaunded they should be stayed a
while, saying: He must first be confirmed King by the goddes. Then he
tooke the wise men and priests, with whom he went up into the
Capitoll, which that time was yet called mounte Tarpeian. And there,
the chiefest of the soothesayers called Augures, turned him towardes
the southe, having his face covered with a veyle, and stoode behinde
him, laying his right hande upon his heade, and praying to the goddes
that it would please them to declare their willes by flying of birdes,
or some other token concerning this election: and so the soothesayer
cast his eyes all about, as farre as he could possiblie
discerne. During all this time there was a marvelous silence in the
market place, although then an infinite number of people were
assembled there together, attending with great devotion what the issue
of this divination would be: untill there appeared unto them on the
right hande, good and lucky birdes, which did confirme the
election. Then Numa putting on his regall robes, came downe from
mounte Tarpeian, into the market place, where all the people receyved
him with wonderful showtes of joye, as a man the most holy, and best
beloved of the goddes that they could have chosen. So having taken the
royall seate of the Kingdome, his first acte was this. That he
discharged the garde of the three hundred souldiers, which Romulus had
allwayes about his persone, called Celeres: saying, he would not
mistrust them which trusted him, neither would he be King over people,
which should mistrust him. His second acte was, that he did adde to
the two priests of Jupi- ter and Mars, a thirde, in the honour of
Romulus, who was called Flamen Quirinalis. For the auncient ROMAINES
also called their priests, instituted in the olde time, Flamines, by
reason of certaine litle narrowe hattes which they did weare on their
heades, as if they had called them Pilamines: for Pilos in Greeke
signifieth a hatte. And at that time (as they saye) there were many
moe Greeke wordes mingled with the Latine, then there are at this
daye. For they called the mantells the Kings did weare Lanas. And Iuba
sayeth that it is the very same which the GRECIANS call Chlanas, &
that the younge boye which was a servaunte in the temple of Jupiter,
was called Camillus, as some of the GRECIANs doe yet call the god
Mercurie, bicause he is servaunt of the godds. Now Numa having done
these things at his first entrie into his Kingdome, still to winne
further favour and goodwill of the people: beganne immediately to
frame his cittizens to a certaine civilities being as iron wrought to
softenes, and brought them from their violent and warlike desires, to
temperate and civill manners. For out of doubt, ROME was properly
that, which Plato ascribeth to a cittie full of trouble and
pryde. For, first it was founded by the most coragious and warlike men
of the worlde, which from all partes were gathered there together, in
a most desperate boldnes: & afterwards it increased, and grewe strong,
by armes and continuall warres, like as pyles driven into the grounde,
which the more they are rammed in, the further they enter, and sticke
the faster. Wherefore Numa judging it no small nor light enterprise,
to plucke downe the hawty stomacks of so fierce and violent a people,
and to frame them unto a sobre and quiet life: dyd seeme to worcke it
by meanes of the goddes, withdrawing them on thereto by litle and
litle, and pacifying of their whotte and fierce corages to fight, with
sacrifices, feastes, dauncings, and common processions, wherein he
celebrated ever him selfe. In the which together with their devotion,
there was mingled nowe and then, pastime and pleasure: and sometimes
he layed the terrour and feare of the goddes before their eyes, making
them beleeve that he had seene straunge visions, or that he had heard
voyces, by which the goddes dyd threaten them with some great troubles
and plagues, allwayes to pull downe and humble their heartes, unto the
feare of the goddes. This was the cause why they thought afterwardes
that he had learned his wisdome of Pythagoras the philosopher: bicause
the greatest parte of the philosophie of the one, and of the
government of the other, consisted in suche ceremonies, and divine
studies. They reporte also that Numa dyd put on the outwarde showe and
semblaunce of Pythagoras holiness as following his intention and
example. For Pythagoras as they saye, made an eagle so tame and
gentle, that she would stoupe, and come downe to him by certaine
voyces, as she flewe in the ayer over his bead. And that passing
through the assembly of the games Olvmpicall, he shewed her thighe of
golde, and many other prety feates and deedes they tell of, which
seemed to be wonderfull, and for which Timon Phliasian hath written
these verses of him: Pythagoras which loved to dwell in dignitie, and
had an harte to glorie bent, and past in pollecie, Muche like a man
which sought, by charmig to enchante, did use this arte, to winne mens
mindes, which unto him did haunte. {Prosper+} His grave and pleasaunt
tongue, in sugred speache did flowe, whereby he drewe most mindes of
men, to bent of his owne bowe. Even so the fayned fable of Numa, which
he so cunningly disguised, was about the love of a goddesses or some
Nymphe of the mountaine: with whom he seemed to have certaine secret
meetings and talke, whereof we have spoken before. And it is sayed he
muche frequented the Muses in the woddes. For he would saye, he had
the most parte of his revelations of the Muses, and he taught the
ROMAINES to reverence one of them above all the rest, who was called
Tacita, as ye would saye, ladye silence. It seemeth he invented this,
after the example of Pythagoras, who did so specially commaund, &
recomend silence unto his schollers. Againe, if we consider what Numa
ordeined concerning images, and the representation of the goddes, it
is alltogether agreable unto the doctrine of Pythagoras: who thought
that god was neither sensible, nor mortall, but invisible,
incorruptible, and only intelligible. And Numa dyd forbid the ROMAINES
also to beleeve, that god had ever forme, or likenes of beast or
man. So that in those former times, there was in ROME no image of god,
either painted or graven: and it was from the beginning a hundred
three score and tenne yeres, that they had buylt temples and chappels
unto the godds in ROME, and yet there was neither picture nor image of
god within them. For they tooke it at the first for a sacriledge, to
present heavenly things by earthely formes: seeing we cannot possibly
any waye attaine to the knowledge of god, but in minde and
understanding. The very sacrifices which Numa ordeined, were
altogether agreable, and like unto the manner of serving of the
goddes, which the Pythagorians used. For in their sacrifices they
spilt not the bloude, but they did theirs commonly, with a litle
meale, a litle sheading of wine and milke, & with suche other light
things, suche as affirme that those two men did much company and were
famillier together, doe laye further proofes and arguments for the
same. The first is this: That the ROMAINES did make Pythagoras a free
man of the cittie of ROME, as Fpicharmus the Comicall poet an auncient
writer (and sometimes one of Pythagoras schollers) sayeth in a booke
he wrote and dedicated unto Antenor. The other proofe is: That Numa
having had foure children, called one of them Mamercus, after
Pythagoras sonnes name, from whom they saye is descended, the house of
the AEmelians, which is the noblest of the Patricians: for the King
gave him the surname of AEmylius, bicause of his sweete tongue and
pleasaunt voyce. Furthermore, I my self have heard saye many times in
ROME, that the ROMAINES having receyved an oracle, which commaunded
them to set up images in their cittie, to the wisest and valeantest
man that ever was amongest the GRECIANS: caused two statues of brasse
to be set up in their market place, the one of Pythagoras, and the
other of Alcibiades. Howbeit to strive about this matter any further,
seeing there are so many doubtes: me thincketh it were but
vaine. Moreover, they attribute to Numa the first erection of the
colledge pontifical]: and saye he him selfe was the first Pontifex
that ever was. But touching the name of Pontifex, some will saye they
were so called, bicause they chiefly were ordeined & appointed for the
service of the almightie: for this word potens in the ROMAINE tongue,
betokeneth mightie. Other thincke this name was geven to them by their
founders, as to exempt persones out of the worlde: who enjoyned them
to doe all the service and sacrifices to the goddes they could
possibly, and yet notwithstanding, if they had any other lawfull let
or impediment thereof, they were not straight condemned for omitting
the same. Howbeit the most parte doe bring out another derivation of
this name, wherein me thinckes there is litle reason. As that they
should be called pontifices, bicause they had the charge of
maintenaunce of the bridge. For that which the GRECIANS call gephyran,
the LATINES call Pontem: that is, a bridge. And to saye truely, the
charges of repairing the bridge, belongeth to the bishoppes: aswell as
the keep- ing of the most holy and unchaungeable ceremonies. For the
ROMAlNES thought it not only a thing unlawfull, but tooke it for a
most damnable & wicked acte, to destroye or breake the bridge of
wodde, which was only joyned together (as they saye) with pinnes of
wodde, and without any iron at all, by the commaundement of an olde
oracle. But the stone bridge was buylt long time after the raigne of
Numa, and in the time of the raigne of his nephew Martius. Nowe the
first and chiefest of these bisshopppes, which they call the great
Pontifex, hath the place, authoritie, and dignitie mof the high priest
and master, of their pontificall lawe: who should be carefull, not
only about all publicke sacrifices and ceremonies, but also about
suche as were private, and to see that no man privately should breake
the auncient ceremonies, nor bring in any newe thing into religion,
but rather every man should be taught by him, how, and after what
sorte he should serve and honour the goddes. He also hath the keping
of the holy virgines which they call Vestales. For they doe geve Numa
the first foundation and consecrating of them, and the institution
also of keeping the immortall fire with honour and reverence, which
these virgines have the charge of. Either for that he thought it meete
to commit the substaunce of fire (being pure and cleane) unto the
custodie of cleane and uncorrupt maydes: or els bicause he thought the
nature of fire (which is barren, and bringeth forth nothing) was
fittest, and most proper unto virgines. For in GRECE, where they kept
continuall fire likewise (as in the temple of Apollo in DELPHES, and
at ATHENS) the maydens doe not keepe the same, but olde women which
are past mariage. And if this fire chaunce to faile, as they saye in
ATHENS the holy lampe was put out in the time of the tyrannie of
Aristion: and in the cittie of DELPHES it was put out, when the temple
of Apollo was burnt by the MEDES: and at ROME also, in the time of the
warres that the ROMAINES had against king Mithridates: and in the time
of the civill warres, when altar, fire, and all were burnt and
consumed together: they saye that it must not be lighted againe with
other common fire, but must be made a newe, with drawing cleane and
pure flame from the beames of the sunne, and that they doe in this
manner. They have a hollowe vessell made of a pece of a triangle,
having a corner right, and two sides a like: so that from all partes
of his compasse and circumference, it fareth into one pointe. Then
they set this vessell right against the beames of the sunne, so that
the bright sunne beames come to assemble and gather together in the
center of this vessell, where they doe pearce the ayer so strongely,
that they set it a fire: and when they put to it any drye matter or
substaunce, the fire taketh it straight, bicause the beam of the
sunne, by meanes of the reverberation, putteth that drye matter into
fire, & forceth it to flame. Some thincke that these Vestall virgines
keepe no other thing, but this fire, which never goeth out. Other
saye, there are other holy thinges also, which no bodie maye lawfully
see but they: whereof we have written more largely in the life of
Camillus, at the least so much as maye be learned and tolde. The first
maydens which were vowed and put into the order of religion by Numa,
were (as they saye) Gegania, and Verenia: and after them, Canuleia and
Tarpeia. Afterwardes king Servius increased the number with two other,
and that number of foure continueth untill this daye. Their rule and
order set downe by king Numa was this: that they should vowe chastitie
for the space of thirtie yeres. In the first tenne yeres they learne
what they have to doe: the next tenne yeres following, they doe that
which they have learned: and the last tenne yeres, they teache young
novices. After they have passed their thirtie yeres, they maye
lawfully marie if they be disposed, and take them to another manner of
life, and leave their religion. But as it is reported, there have bene
very fewe of them which have taken this libertie, and fewer also which
have joyed after they were professed, but rather have repented them
selves, and lived ever after a very grievous and sorowfull life. This
did so fraye the other Vestalls, that they were better contented with
their vowed chastitie: and so remained virgines, untill they were
olde, or els died. He gave them also great priviledges, and
prerogatives. As: to make their will and testament, in their fathers
life time. To doe all things without any gardian or overseer, as women
which have three children at a birth. When they goe abroade, they
carie maces before them to honour them. And if by chaunce they meete
any offendour in their waye, going to execution, they save his life:
howbeit the professed Vestall must affirme by othe, that she met him
unwares, and not of set purpose. If any man presume under their
chayer, whereupon they are caried through the cittie, he shall die for
it. Also when they them selves doe any faulte they are corrected by
the great byshoppe who somtimes doth whippe them naked (acording to
the nature & qualitie of their offence) in a darcke place, and under a
curten. But she that hath deflowred her virginity, is buried quicke by
one of the gates of the cittie, which they call Collina gate: where
within the cittie there is a mount of earth of a good length, and with
the LATINES is sayed to be raised. Under this forced mount, they make
a litle hollowe vawte, & leave a hole open, whereby one maye goe
downe: and with in it there is set a litle bed, a burning lampe, and
some vitells to susteine life withall. As a litle bread, a litle
water, a litle milke, and a litle oyle, and that for honours sake: to
the ende they would not be thought to famishe a bodie to deathe, which
had bene consecrated by the most holy and devoute ceremonies of the
worlde. This done, they take the offender, and put her into a litter,
which they cover strongely, and close it up with thicke leather in
suche sorte, that no bodie canne so much as heare her voyce, and so
they carie her thus shut up through the market place. Every one
draweth backe, when they see this litter a farre of, and doe geve it
place to passe by: and then follow it mourningly, with heavy lookes,
and speake never a word. They doe nothing in the citie more fearefull
to behold, then this: neither is there any daye wherein the people are
more sorowful, then on such a daye. Then after she is come to the
place of this vawte, the sergeants straight unlose these fast bounde
coverings: and the chiefe byshoppe after he hath made certen secret
prayers unto the godds, and lift his handes up to heaven, taketh out
of the litter, the condemned Vestall muffled up close, and so putteth
her upon the ladder, which conveyeth her downe into the vawte. That
done, he withdraweth, and all the priestes with him: and when the
seely offendour is gone downe, they straight plucke up the ladder, and
cast aboundaunce of earthe in at the open hole, so that they fill it
up to the very toppe of the arche. And this is the punishment of the
Vestalls which defile their virginide. They thincke also it was Numa
that buylt the round temple of the goddesse Vesta, in which is kept
the everlasdng fire: meaning to reptesent not the forme of the earth,
which they saye is Vesta, but the figure of the whole world, in the
middest whereof (according to the Pythagorians opinion) remaineth the
proper seate and abiding place of fire, which they call Vesta, and
name it the unitie. For they are of opinion, neither that the earth is
unmoveable, nor yet that it is set in the middest of the world,
neither that the heaven goeth about it: but saye to the contrarie,
that the earth hanged in the ayer about the fire, as about the center
thereof. Neither will they graunte, that the earth {Copernicus+} is
one of the first and chiefest partes of the world: as Plato held
opinion in that age, that the earthe was in another place than in the
very middest, and that the center of the world, as the most
honorablest place did apperteine to some other of more worthy
substaunce than the earthe. Furthermore, the byshoppes office was to
show those that needed to be taught, all the rites, manners, and
customes of buriall: whom Numa taught not to beleeve that there was
any corruption or dishonesty in burialles, but rather it was to
worshippe and honour the godds of the earthe, with usuall and
honorable ceremonies, as those which after their death receyve the
chiefest service of us that they canne. But above all other in
burialles, they did specially honour the goddesse called Libitina,
that is sayed, the chiefe governour and preserver of the rites of the
dead: or be it Proserpina, or Venus, as the most learned men among the
ROMAINES doe judge, who not without cause doe attribute the order of
the beginning and ende of mans life, to one self god, and power
divine. Numa ordeined also, how long time every bodie should mourne+
in blackes. And for a childe from three yeres to tenne yeres of age,
that died: he ordeined they should mourne no more monethes then it had
lived yeres, and not to adde a daye more. For he commaunded, that the
longest time of mourning should be but ten moneths onely, and so long
time at the least he willed women should remaine widdowes, after the
decease of their husbands: or els she that would marie within that
time, was bounde by his order to sacrifice a whole bullocke. Numa also
erected many other orders of priestes: of two sortes whereof I will
only make mention. The one shal be the order of the SALII, and the
other of the FECIALIES: for me thinckes, both the one and the other
doth manifestly showe the great holiness and singular devotion which
he had in him. The FECIALES are properly those, which the GRECIANS
call IRENOPHYLACES, as who would saye, peacekeepers. And in my
judgement, they had their right name according to their office,
bicause they did pacifie quarells with reason by waye of order, and
did not suffer (as much as in them laye) that any matter should be
tried by violence, untill they were past all hope of any peace+. For
the GRECIANS Call it properly Irenen, when both parties agree, and
decide their controversie with reason, and not with sworde. Even so
those which the ROMAINES called the Feciales, went many times in
persone to those that dyd the ROMAINES injurie, and sought to persuade
them with good reason, to keepe promise with the ROMAINES, and to
offer them no wrong. But if they would not yeld to reason, whom they
sought to persuade: then they called the goddes to the witnes thereof,
and prayed them, that if they dyd not most earnestly incense the
ROMAINES, to pursue that most justely apperteined unto their right,
that all evills and mischieves of the warres might fall upon them
selves, & on their countrie. This done, they dyd threaten open warres
against such enemies. And if the FECIALES would not consent to open
warres, and dyd happen to speake against them: it was not lawfull in
that case, neither for private persone, nor for the King him selfe to
make any warres. But like a just prince, he must have leave by their
sufferance to make the warres. Then dyd he consider, and consult, by
what meanes he might best procure, and prosecute the same. Concerning
this matter, they judge that the ill happe which came to the ROMAINES,
when the cittie of ROME was taken and sacked by the GAVLES, chaunced
justely for breaking of this holy institution. For at that time, the
barbarous people besieged the cittie of the CLVSINIANS: and Fabius
Ambustus was sent ambassadour unto them, to see if he could make peace
betweene them. The barbarous people gave him an ill aunswer: whereupon
Fabius thincking his embasie had bene ended, and being somwhat whotte,
and rashe in defence of the CLVSINIANS, gave defiaunce to the
valliantest GAVLE, there, to fight with him man to man. Fortune
favored him in this chalenge: for he slew the GAVLE, and stripped him
in the fielde. The GAVLES seeing their man slayne, sent immediately an
heraulde to ROME, to accuse Fabius, howe against all right and reason,
he beganne warres with them, without any open proclamation made
before. The FECIALES being then consulted with thereabout, did
declare, he ought to be delivered into the handes of the GAVLES, as
one that had broken the lawe of armes, and had deserved it: but he
made friends to the people which favored him very much, & by their
meanes escaped his deliverie, and punishment. Neverthles, the GAVLES
within shorte time after, came before ROME with all their power: which
they tooke, sacked, & burnt every whit, saving the Capitoll, as we
have written more amplie in the life of Camillus. Now concerning the
Priestes that were called Salii they saye he dyd institute them upon
this occasion. In the eight yere of his reigne, there came a pestilent
disease through all ITALIE, and at the length it crept also into
ROME. Whereat every man being greatly affrayed, and discoraged, they
saye there fell from heaven a target of copper, which lighted betweene
the handes of Numa. They tell hereof a wonderfull tale, which the King
him selfe affirmed he heard, of the Nymphe Egeria, and the Muses. To
wit, that this target was sent from heaven, for the health and
preservation of the cittie: and therefore he should keepe it
carefully, & cause eleven other to be cast and made, all like unto the
same in facion and greatness to the ende, that if any would enterprise
to steale it, he should not tell which of them to take for the right
target. Moreover he said, he was commaunded to consecrate the place to
the Muses (in the which he dyd oftentimes companie with them) and also
the fieldes which were neere thereabouts: and likewise to geve the
fountains that sprange in that place, unto the Vestalls professed,
that every daye they might drawe water at that well, to washe the
sanctuarie of their temple. The successe hereof proved his words true,
for the sicknes ceased incontinently. So he assembled all the chief
craftes men then in ROME to prove which of them would take upon him to
make one like unto that. Every man despayred to performe it. Howbeit
one called Veturius Mamurius (the excellentest workeman that was in
those dayes) dyd make them all so sute like, that Numa him selfe dyd
not knowe the first target, when they were all layed together. So he
ordeined these priests Salii to have the custodie of these targets, to
see them safe kept. They were called Salii not after the name of a
SALIAN borne in SAMOTHRACIA, or in MANTINEA, as some have untruely
alleaged, who first invented the manner of dauncing all armed: but
they were so called, of their facion and manner of dauncing, and
leaping. For in the moneth of Marche, they goe skipping & leaping up &
downe the cittie with those targetes on their armes, apparelled in red
cassockes without sleves, and girded about with broade leather sworde
girders, studded with copper, having helmets of copper on their heads,
and striking upon their targets with shorte daggers, which they carie
in their hands. Moreover, all their dauncing consisteth in moving of
their feete: for they handle them finely, making tornes above ground
and beneath, with a sodaine measure, and a marvelous force of
agilitie. They call these targets Anglia, bicause of their facion,
which is not altogether compasse: for they are not all round as other
common targets be, but they are cut with circles wreathed about, both
the endes bowing in many foldes, and one so neere another, that
altogether they come to a certaine wreathed forme, which the GRECIANS
call Angion. Or els they are so called, bicause Ancon signifieth an
elbow, upon which they carie them. All these derivations are written
in the historie of Juba, who in any case will have this word Anglia to
be drawen out of the Greeke tongue. And it maye be also they were so
called, bicause the first came from above, which the GRECIANS call
Anecathen: or els for healing the sicke, which is called Acesis. Or
els for ceasing of the drines, which in Greke is called, Anchmon
Lysis. Or for the ending of all diseases and evills, for which cause
the ATHENIANS call Caftor and Pollux, Anacas: if they lust to geve
this word his derivation from the Greeke tongue. Now the reward which
Mamurius the goldsmithe had for the making of these targets was, that
the Salii unto this daye doe make mention of him, in their songe,
which they singe going through the cittie, and dauncing of their
daunce all armed. Howbeit some thincke they saye not Veturius
Mamurius, but veterem memoriam, auncient memorie. But Numa after he
had ordeined & instituted these orders of priests, built his palace
neere unto the temple of Vesta, which holdeth his name Regia at this
daye, to saye, the Kings palace. In which he remained most part of his
life, studying either to sacrifice to the goddes, or to teache the
Priestes what they should doe, or howe with them he should best
contemplate all heavenly things. It is true that he had another house
on the hill, which they call at this daye, Quirinall, the place
whereof is yet to be seene. But in all these sacrifices, ceremonies,
and processions of the Priestes, there were allwayes husshers that
went before, crying to the people, kepe silence, and tend upon divine
service. For they saye the Pythagorians thought it good, that men
shoudld not worshippe the godds, nor make prayers to them in passing
by, or doing any other thing: but they thought it mete, that men
should of pur- pose goe out of their houses, to serve and praye unto
them. Even so king Numa thought it not meete, that his subjects should
come to see, and heare divine service negligently, as it were for a
facion, and only to be ryd of it, as heeding an other thing: but he
would have them set a side all other busines and employ their thoughts
and harts only upon the principal service of religion, and devotion
towards the godds. So that during service time, he would not have
heard any noise, any knocking, bounsing, or any clapping, as they
commonly heare in all artificers shoppes of occupation, whereof at
this daye yet they see some signes, & tokens, remaining in their
sacrifices at ROME. For all the time the Augure beholdeth the flying
of the birds, or that he is doing any sacrifice, the vergers crie
alowde: Hoc age, which meaneth, tend this. And it is a warning to
those that are present, to call their witte home, and to thincke on
that which is in hand. Also there are many of his orders like the
preceptes of the Pythagorians. For as they dyd warne men, not to sit
upon a litle busshell, not to cut fire with a sword, not to looke
behinde them when they goe abroade: to sacrifice to the celestiall
godds in an odde number, and to the goddes of the earth in an even
number, of which precepts, they would not have the common people to
have any knowledge or understanding. Even so there are many
institutions of Numa, the reasons whereof are hidden & kept secret: as
not to offer wine to the godds of the vine never cut, and not to
sacrifice unto them without meale: & to turne a turne about when they
doe reverence to the godds, & to sit down after they have worshipped
them. And as touching the two first ordinances, it seemeth that by
them he did recommend clemency, and humanity, as being a parte of the
devotion towards the godds. But as for the turning which he willeth
them to make, that worshippe the goddes: they saye it representeth the
turning which the element maketh by his moving. But me thincketh it
should rather come of this: for that the temples being set to the
east, he that worshippeth entring into the temple, sheweth his backe
to the West, and for this cause turneth towardes that parte, &
afterwards returneth againe towards god: doing the whole turne, and
ending the consummation of his prayer, by this double adoration which
he maketh before and behinde. Onles peradventure that he ment secretly
to signifie, & geve them to understande by this turning and chaunging
of their looke, that which the ECYPTIANS figured by their wheels: in
showing therby, that these worldly things were never constant and in
one state. And therfore, that we should take it thankfully, and
paciently beare it, in what sorte soever it pleased god to chaunge or
alter our life. And where he commaunded that they should sit after
they had worshipped god: they sayed it was a token of a good hope unto
them that prayed, that their prayers should be exalted, and that their
goods should remaine safe, and sticke by them. Other saye, that this
ease and sitting, is a separating them from doing: and therfore he
would they should sit in the temples of the godds, to shew they had
done that which they had in hand before, to the end to take of the
godds the beginning of another. And it maye well be also, that it was
referred to the thing we spake of a litle before. That Numa would
accustome his people, not to serve the godds, nor to speake to them at
all, as they passed by, or did any other thing, or were in haste: but
would have them praye unto the godds when they had time and leysure,
and all other busines at that time set a parte. By this good
instruction and training of them unto religion, the cittie of ROME by
litle and litle came to be so tractable, and had the great power of
king Numa in such admiration: that they tooke all to be as true as the
gospell that he spake, though it had no more likelyhood of trothe,
then tales devised of pleasure. Furthermore, they thought nothing
incredible, or unpossible to him, if he would have it. And for proofe
hereof, there goeth a tale of him, that he having bidden a great
company of the cittizens of ROME tocome and suppe with him, caused
them to be served with plaine grosse meate, and in very poore and
homely vessell. And when they were set, and beganne to fall to their
meate, he cast out words sodainely unto them, how the goddesse with
whom he accompanied, was come to see him even at that instant, and
that sodainely the hall was tichely furnished, and the tables covered
with all sortes of excellent fine and delicate meates. Howbeit this
farre passed all the vanity of lying which is found written of him,
about his speaking with Jupiter. The hill Aventine was not at that
time inhabited, nor inclosed within the walles of ROME, but was full
of springs and shadowed groves, whether commonly repaired to solace
them selves, the two godds, Picus and Faunus, which otherwise might be
thought two Satyres, or of the race of the Titanians: saving it is
sayed, that they went through all ITALIE, doing the like miracles and
wonders in phisycke, charmes and arte magike, which they reporte of
those the GRECIANS call Idaees Dactyles. There they saye that Numa
tooke them both, having put into the spring both wine and honnie,
where they used to drinke. When they saw that they were taken, they
transformed them selves into divers forms, disguising and disfiguring
their naturall shape, into many terrible and feareful sights to
behold. Nevertheles in the end, perceiving they were so fast, as to
escape there was no reckoning: they revealed unto him many things to
come, and taught him the purifying against lightning and thunder,
which they make yet at this daye with onions, heare, and
pitchers. Other saye, he was not taught that by them, but that they
fetched Jupi- ter out of heaven, with their conjuring and magicke:
whereat Jupiter being offended aunswered in choller that he should
make it with heads. But Numa added straight, of onions: Jupiter
replied, of men. Then Numa asked him againe to take a litle away the
cruelty of the commaundement: What heares? Jupiter aunsweted, quicke
hears. And Numa put to pilchers also. And it is reported that this was
the goddesse Egeria, that taught Numa this subtiltie. This done,
Jupiter returned appeased: by reason whereof the place was called
Ilicium. For Ileos in the Greeke tongue signifieth appeased, &
favorable: & this purifying was afterwards made in that sorte. These
tales not onely vayne, but fall of mockerie also, doe show us yet
plainely the zeale and devotion men had in those times towards the
godds: unto which Numa through custome had wonne them. And as for Numa
him self, they saye that he so firmely put all his hope and confidence
in the helpe of the godds: that one daye when he was told his enemies
were in armes against him, he did but laugh at it, and aunswered. And
I doe sacrifice. It is he (as some saye) that fitst built a temple to
Faith and Terme: and which made the ROMAINES understand, that the most
holy and greatest othe they could make, was to sweare by their faith,
which they kepe yet at this daye. But Terme, which signifieth bounds,
is the god of confines, or borders: unto whom they doe sacrifice, both
publickly and privately, upon the limites of inheritaunces, & now they
sacrifice unto him five beasts. Howbeit in old time they did sacrifice
unto him without any bloude, through the wise institution of Numa: who
declared & preached unto them, that this god of bounds was syncere,
and upright, without bloud or murther, as he that is a witnes of
justice, and a keper of peace. It was he, which in my opinion, did
first limit out the bounds of the territorie of ROME: which Romulus
would never doe, for feare least in bounding out his owne, he should
confesse that which he occupied of other mens. For bounding and
mearing, to him that will keepe it justely: is a bond that brideles
power and desire. But to him that forceth not to kepe it: it is a
proofe to shew his injustice. To saye truely, the territories of ROIE
had no great bounds at the first beginning, and Romulus had got by
conquest the greatest parte of it, and Numa did wholy devide it unto
the nedie inhabitans to releve them, and to bring them out of poverty:
(which carieth men hedlong into mischief, and discourageth them to
labour) to the end that plowing up the said lande, they should also
plowe up the weedes of their own barrenness to become civill and
gentle. For there is no exercise nor occupation in the world, which so
sodainely bringeth a man, to love and desire quietness as doth
hushandrie_and_tillage+: and yet to defend a mans own, there is in it
corage & hardines to fight. But greedy desire, violently to take from
others, and unjustely to occupie that is none of theirs, is never in
right husbandmen. And therfore Numa having brought in husbandrie
amongest his subjects, as a medecine and meane to make them love
quietnes: was desirous to inure them to this trade of life, the rather
to make them humble and gentle of condition, then to increase them in
riches. He devided all the territorie of ROME into certen parts which
he called Pagos: as much to saye, as villages. And in every one of
them he ordeined controllers & visiters, which should survey all
about: and he him self somtimes went abroade in persone, conjecturing
by their labour, the manners and nature of every man. Such as he found
diligent, he advaunced them unto honour, & gave them countenaunce and
authoritie: other which he sawe slowthfull & negligent, by rebuking
and reproving of them, he made them amend. But amongest all his
ordinaunces which he made, one above all the rest caried the praise:
and that was, that he devided his people into sundrie occupations. For
the cittie of ROME seemed yet to be made of two nations, as we have
sayed before: and to speake more properly, it was made of two
tribes. So that it could not, or would not for any thing be made one:
being altogether impossible to take away all factions, and to make
there should be no quarrells nor contentions betwene both
parts. Wherefore he considered, that when one will mingle two bodies
or simples together, which for their hardnes and contrarie natures
cannot well suffer mixture: then he breaks and beates them together,
as small as may be. For, so being brought into a smaller and lesser
powder, they would incorporate & agree the better. Even so he thought
it was hest to devide the people also into many small partes: by
meanes whereof they should be put into many parties, which would more
easely take away the first and the greatest parte, when it should be
devided and separated thus into sundrie sorts. And this division he
made by arts and occupations: as minstrells, goldsmiths, carpinters,
diers, shoemakers, tawers, tanners, bell founders, and pot makers, and
so forth through other craftes and occupations. So that he brought
every one of these into one bodie, and companie by it self. and
ordeined unto every particular mysterie or crafte, their feasts,
assemblies, and services, which they should make unto the godds,
according to the dignitie and worthines of every occupation. And by
this meanes, he first tooke away all faction+: that neither side
sayed, nor thought any more, those are SABYNES, these are ROMAINFS,
these are of Tatius, these are of Romulus. Insomuch as this division
was an incorporating, and an uniting of the whole together. Among
other his ordinaunces, they did much commend his reforming of the law,
that gave libertie unto fathers to sell their children. For he did
except chil- dren already maried, so they were maried with their
fathers consent and goodwill: judging it to be to cruell and over hard
a thine, that a woman who thought she had maried a free man, should
find her self to be the wife of a bond man. He beganne also to mende a
litle the calender, not so exactly as he should have done, nor yet
altogether ignorantly. For during the raigne of Romulus, they used the
moneths confusedly, without any order or reason making some of them
twenty dayes and lesse, and others five and thirtie dayes and more,
without knowing the difference betwene the course of the sunne and the
moone: and only they observed this rule, that there was three hundred
& three score dayes in the yere. But Numa considering the inequality
stoode upon eleven dayes, for that the 12. revolutions of the moone
are ronne in 300. fiftie and foure dayes, and the revolution of the
sunne, in-365. dayes, he doubled the 11. dayes, whereof he made a
moneth: which he placed from 2 yeres to 2 yeres, after the moneth of
February, and the ROMAINES called this moneth put betwene, Mercidinum,
which had 22. dayes. And this is the correction that Numa made, which
since hath had a farre better amendment. He did also chaunge the order
of the moneths. For Marche which before was the first, he made it now
the third: and January the first, which under Romulus was the 11. and
February the 12. & last. Yet many are of opinion, that Numa added
these two, January and February. For the ROMAINEs at the beginning had
but tenne moneths in the yere: as some of the barbarous people make
but three moneths for their yere. And the ARCADIANS amongest the
GRECIANS have but foure moneths for their yere. The ARCARNANIANS have
sixe to the yere. And the EGYPTIANS had first but one moneth to their
yere: & afterwards they made foure moneths for their yere. And this is
the cause why they seeme (albeit they inhabite in a new countrie) to
be nevertheles the auncientest people of the world: for that in their
chronicles they reckon up such infinite number of yeres, as those
which counte the moneths for the yeres. And to prove this true, that
the ROMAINES at the beginning had but tenne moneths in the yere, and
not twelve: it is easely to be judged by the name of the last, which
they call at this daye December. And that the moneth of Marche was
also the first, maye be conjectured by this: for the fift moneth after
that, is yet called Quintilis: the 6 Sextilis, and so the other in
order following the numbers. For if January and February had then bene
the first, of necessitie the moneth of July, which they call
Quintilis, must have bene named September: considering also that it is
very likely, that the moneth which Romulus had dedicated unto Mars,
was also by him ordeined to be the first. The second was Aprill: so
called of the name Aphrodite, that is to saye Venus, unto whom they
make open sacrifice in this moneth. And on the first daye of the same,
women doe washe them selves, having a garland of myrtle upon their
heades. {mayday+} Howbeit some other saye, that it was not called
after the name of Aphrodite, but it was only called Aprilis, bicause
then is the chiefest force and strength of the spring, at which season
the earth doth open, and the seedes of plants and erbes beginne to bud
and showe forth, which the word it selfe doth signifie. The moneth
following next after that, is called Maye: after the name of Maia, the
mother of Mercurie, unto whom the moneth is consecrated. The moneth of
June is so called also, bicause of the quality of that season, which
is as the youthe of the yere. Although some will saye, that the moneth
of Maye was named of this word Majores, which signifieth as much as
the elders: and the moneth of June, of Juniores, which signifies the
younger men. All the other following, were named in old time by the
numbers according to their order, Quintilis, Sextilis, September,
October, November, & December. But Quintilis, was afterward called
Iulius, of the name of Julius Caesar, who slew Pompeius. And Sextilis
was named Augustus, Octavius Caesars successour in the empire, who was
also surnamed Augustus. It is true also that Domitian would they
should call the two moneths following (which are September & October)
the one Germanicus, & the other Domitianus. But that helde not longe:
for so soone as Domitian was killed, the moneths recovered their
auncient names againe. The two last moneths only, have ever continued
their names, without chaunging or altering. But of the two which Numa
added, or at the least translated: the moneth df February doth
signifie as much as purging, or at the least the derivation of the
word sowndeth neere it. In this moneth, they doe sacrifice of plantes,
and doe celebrate the feast of the Lupercales, in which there are many
things agreable, and like to the sacrifices made for purification. And
the first, which is January, was called after the name of
Janus. Wherefore me thinckes that Numa tooke away the moneth of Marche
from the first place, and gave it unto January: bicause he would have
peace preferred before warre, and civill things before marshall. For
this Janus (were he King, or demigod) in the former age was counted
very civill & polllticke. For he chaunged the life of men, which
before his time was rude, cruell, and wild: and brought it to be
honest, gentle, and civill. For this cause they doe painte his image
at this daye with two faces, the one before, and the other behinde,
for thus chaunging the lives of men. And there is in ROME a temple
dedicated unto him, which hath two doores, that be called the doores
of warre: for the custome is to open them, when the ROMAINES have any
warres in any place, and to shut them when they be at peace. To have
them shut, it was a rare thinge to see, and happened very seldome: by
reason of the greatnes of their empire, which of all sides was
environned with barbarous nations whom they were compelled to keepe
under with force of armes. Notwithstanding it was once shut up in the
time of Augustus, after he had slaine Antonie: and once before also in
the yere when Marcus Attillius and Titus Manlius were Consuls. But
that continued not long, for it was opened again incontinently, by
reason of warres that came upon them sone after. Howbeit during the
raigne of Numa, it was never one day opened, but remained shut
continually by the space of three and forty yeres together. For all
occasions of warres, were then utterly dead and forgotten: bicause at
ROME the people were not only through the example of justice,
clemencie, and the goodnes of the King brought to be quiet, and to
love peace: but in the citties thereabouts, there begmne a marvelous
chaunge of manners & alteration of life, as if some gentle ayer had
breathed on them, by some gratious and healthfull wind, blowen from
RomE {unilat_disarm+} to refresh them. And thereby bred in mens mindes
such a harty desire to live in peace, to till the ground, to bring up
their children, and to serve the goddes truely: that almost through
all ITALIE, there was nothing but feastes, playes, sacrifices, and
bankets. The peopl did traffike and frequent together, without feare
or daunger, and visited one another, making great cheere: as if out of
the springing fountains of Numaes wisedom many pretie brookes and
streames of good and honest life had ronne over all ITALIE, and had
watered it: and that the mildnes of his wisdom had from hand to hand
bene dispersed through the whole world. Insomuch, as the over
excessive speaches the Poets accustomably doe use, were not sufficient
enough to expresse the peaceable raigne of that time.  There: spiders
weave, their cobwebbes daye and night in harnesses, which wont to
serve for warre: there: cancred rust doth fret, the aeele full bright
of trenchant blades, well whet in many a larre. There: mighie speares
for lacke of use are eaten, with rotten wormes: and in that countrie
there, the braying trompe dothe never seeme to threaten, their quiet
eares, with blasts of bloudy feare. There: in that lande, no drowsie
sleepe is broken, with hotte alarmes, which terrours doe betoken. For
during all king Numaes raigne, it was never heard that ever there were
any warres, civil dissention, or innovation of government attempted
against him, nor yet any secret enmitie or malice borne him, neither
any conspiracie once thought on to reigne in his place. And whether it
was for feare of displeasing the godds (which visibly seemed to take
him into their protection) or for the reverent regarde they had unto
his vertue, or for his prosperous and good successe all the time he
raigned, I cannot tell: howbeit he sought to keepe men still pure, and
honest, from all wickedness and layed most open before the eyes of the
whole world, a very example of that which Plato long time after did
affirme, and saye, concerning true government: which was. That the
only meane of true quietness and remedy from all evill (which ever
troubleth men) was: when by some divine ordinaunce from above there
meteth in one person, the right majestie of a King, and the minde of a
wise philosopher, to make vertue governesse and ruler over vice. For
in deede happie is such a wise man, and more happy are they, which
maye heare the grave counsaill, and good lessons of such a mouthe. And
there me thincks needeth no force, no compulsion, no threates, nor
extremitie to bridle the people. For men seeing the true image of
vertue in their visible prince, and in the example of his life, do
willingly growe to be wise, and of them selves doe fall into love,
liking, and friendshippe together, and doe use all temperaunce, just
dealing, and good order one toward another, leading their life without
offence, and with the commendation of other: which is the chiefe
pointe of felicitie, and the more happie good that can light unto
men. And he by nature is best worthy to be a King, who through his
wisdome & vertue, can graffe in mens manners such a good disposition:
and t@s,LVuma above all other, seemed best to knowe and
underaand. Furthermore, touching his wives and children, there are
great contrarieties among the historiographers. For some of them saye,
he never maried other wife then Tatia, and that he never had any
children, but one only daughter, and she was called Pompilia. Other
write to the contrarie, that he had foure sonnes, Pompo, Pinus,
Calpus, and Mamercus: of every one of the which (by succession from
the father to the sonne) have descended the noblest races, & most
auncient houses of the ROMAINES. As the house of the Pomponians, of
Pompo: the house of the Pinarians, of Pinus: the house of the
Caphurnians, of Calpus: and the house of the Mamercians, of
Mamercus. All which families by reason of their first progenitor have
kept the surname of Reges, Kings. There are three other writers, which
doe reprove the two first: saying that they dyd write to gratifie the
families, making them falsely to descend of the noble race of king
Numa. Moreover it is sayed, he had his daughter Pompilia, not by
Tatia, but by his otherwise called Lucretia, whom he maried after he
was made King. Howbeit they all agree, that his daughter Pompilia was
maried unto one Martius, the sonne of the same Martius, which
persuaded him to accept the kingdome of ROME. For he went with him to
ROME, to remaine there: where they dyd him the honour to receyve him
into the number of the Senatours. After the death of Numa, Martius the
father stoode against Tullus Hostilius for the succession of the
Realme, and being overcome, he killed him selfe for sorowe. But his
sonne Martius, who maried Pompilia, continued still at ROME, where he
begotte Ancus Martius, who was king of ROME after Tullus Hostilius,
and was but five yere olde when Numa dyed. Whose death was not
sodaine. For he dyed consuming by litle and litle, aswell through age,
as also through a lingring disease that waited on him to his ende, as
Piso hath written: and Numa at his death was litle more, then foure
score yere old. But the pompe and honour done unto him at his
funeralles, made his life yet more happie and glorious. {posterity+}
For all the people his neighhours, friendes, kinsemen, and allies of
the ROMAINES came thither, bringing crownes with them, & other
publicke contributions to honour his obsequies. The noble men selves
of the cittie (which were called Patricians) caried on their shoulders
the very bedd, on which the course laye, to be conveyed to his
grave. The Priestes attended also on his bodie, and so dyd all the
rest of the people, women and children in like case, which followed
him to his tumbe, all bewaling and lamenting his death, with teares,
sighes, and mournings. Not as a King dead for very age, but as they
had mourned for the death of their dearest kinseman, and nearest
friende that had dyed before he was olde. They burnt not his bodie,
bicause (as some saye) he commaunded the contrarie by his will &
testament: but they made two coffines of stone, which they buried at
the foote of the hill called Janiculum. In the one they layed his
bodie, & in the other the holy bookes which he had written him selfe,
much like unto those, which they that made the lawes among the
GRECIANS dyd write in tables. But bicause in his life time he had
taught the priestes, the substaunce of the whole contein- ed in the
same: he willed the holy tables which he had written, should be buried
with his bodie. For he thought it not reasonable that so holy matters
should be kept by dead letters and writings, but by mens manners &
exercises. And he followed herein they saye, the Pythagorians, who
would not put their worckes in writing, but dyd printe the knowledge
of them in their memories, whom they knew to be worthy men, and that
without any writing at all. And if they had taught any manner of
persone the hidden rules and secretes of Geometrie, which had not bene
worthy of them: then they sayed the goddes by manifest tokens would
threaten, to revenge such sacriledge and impietie, with some great
destruction & miserie. Therefore, seeing so many things agreable, and
altogether like betweene Numa and Pythagoras, I easely pardone those
which mainteine their opinion, that Numa and Pythagoras were
familiarly acquainted, and conversant together. Valerius Antias the
historian writeth, there were twelve bookes written concerning the
office of Priestes, and twelve other containing the philosophie of the
GRECIANS. And that foure hundred yeres after (in the same yere when
Publius Cornelius, and Marcus Bebius were consuls) there fell a great
rage of waters and raine, which opened the earthe, & discovered these
coffines: and the liddes and covers thereof being caried awaye, they
founde the one altogether voyde, having no manner of likelyhoode, or
token of a bodie that had layen in it: and in the other they founde
these bookes, which were delivered unto one named Petilius (at that
time Prator) who had the charge to reade them over, and to make the
reporte of them. But he having perused them over, declared to the
Senate, that he thought it not convenient the matters contained in
them should be published unto the simple people: and for that cause
they were caried into the market place, and there were openly
burnte. Surely it is a common thing, that happeneth unto all good and
just men, that they are farre more praysed and esteemed after their
death, then before: bicause that envie doth not long continue after
their death, & oftentimes it dieth before them. But notwithstanding,
the misfortunes which chaunced afterwardes unto the five Kings which
raigned at ROME after Numa, have made his honour shine, with much more
noble glorie then before. For the last of them was driven out of his
Kingdome, & died in exile, after he was very olde. And of the other
foure, none of them died their naturall death, but three of them were
killed by treason. And Tullus Hostilius which raigned after Numa,
deriding, and contemning the most parte of his good and holy
institutions, and chiefly his devotion towardes the goddes, as a thing
which made men lowly and fainte harted: dyd assone as ever he came to
be King, turne all his subjects hartes to the warres. But this mad
humour of his, continued not long. For he was plagued with a straunge,
and most grievous disease that followed him, which brought him to
chaunge his minde, and dyd farre otherwise turne his contempt of
Religion, into an overfearfull supersdtion, which dyd nothing yet
resemble the true Religion and devotion of Numa: and besides, he
infected others with his contagious errour, through the inconvenience
which happened unto him at his death. For he was striken and burnt
with lightning.

THE COMPARISON OF LYCVRGVS WITH NUMA

THUS having written the lives of Lycurgus and Numa, the matter
requireth, though it be somewhat harde to doe, that we comparing the
one with the other, should set out the difference betweene them. For
in those things wherein they were like of condition, their deedes doe
shewe it sufficiently. As in their temperaunce, their devotion to the
goddes, their wisdome in governing, and their discreete handling of
their people, by making them beleeve that the goddes had revealed the
lawes unto them, which they established. And nowe to come unto their
qualities, which are diversely, and severally commendedin either of
them. Their first qualitie is, that Numa accepted the Kingdome, and
Lycurgus gave it up. The one received it, not seeking for it: and the
other having it in his handes, did restore it againe. The one being a
gtraunger, and a private man: was by straungers elected and chosen,
their lorde and King. The other being in possession a King, made him
selfe againe a private persone. Suer it is a goodly thing to obtaine a
Realme by justice: but it is a goodlier thing to esteeme justice above
a Realme. Vertue brought the one to be in such reputation, that he was
judged worthy to be chosen a King: and vertue bred so noble a minde in
the other, that he esteemed not to be a King. {generosity+} Their
second qualitie is, that like as in an instrument of musicke, the one
of them did tune & wrest up the slacke stringes which were in SPARTA:
so the other slackened, and set them lower, which were to highe
mounted in ROME. Wherein Lycurgus difficulty was the greater. For he
did not persuade his cittizens, to plucke of their armour and curates,
nor to laye by their swordes: but only to leave their golde and
silver, to forsake their softe beddes, their fine wrought tables, and
other curious riche furniture, and not to leave of the travell of
warres, to geve them selves only unto feastes, sacrifices, and
playes. But to the contrarie, to geve up bancketing and feasting, and
continually to take paynes in the warres, yelding their bodies to all
kinde of paynes. By which meanes, the one for the love and reverence
they did beare him, easely per- suaded all that he would: and the
other, by putting him selfe in daunger, & being hurte also, obtained
not without great travell and adventure, the end of his intended
purpose and desire. Numa his muse was so gentle, loving, & curteous,
that the manners of his cittizens, which before were furious and
violent, were now so tractable and civill, that he taught them to love
peace and justice. And to the contraries if they will compell me to
number amongest the lawes and ordinaunces of Lycurgus, that which we
have written touching the ILOTES, which was a barbarous cruell thing:
I must of force confesse that Numa was muche wiser, more gentle, and
civill in his lawes, considering that even unto those which in deede
were borne slaves, he gave some litle tast of honour, and sweetnes of
libertie, having ordained, that in the feastes of Saturne, they should
sit downe at meate, at their masters owne table. Some holde opinion,
that this custome was brought in by king Numa: who willed that those,
which through their labour in tillage brought in much fruite, should
have some pleasure thereof to make good cheere with the first fruites
of the same. Other imagine, that it is yet a token and remembraunce of
the equalitie, which was emongest men in the world in Saturnes time,
when there was neither mafter nor servaunte, but all men were a like
equall, as brethern or kinsemen. To conclude, it seemeth either of
them tooke a direst course, thought best to them selves, to frame
their people unto temperaunce, and to be contented with their
owne. But for their other vertues, it appeareth that the one loved
warre best, and the other justice: onles it were that men would saye,
that for the diversitie of the nature or custome of their people
(which were almost conttarie in manners) they were both compelled to
use also contrary and divers meanes from other. For it was not of a
fainte harte, that Numa tooke from his people the use of armes, and
desire to be in warres: but it was to the ende they should not doe any
wrong to others. Neither did Lycurgus also studie to make his people
souldiers and warlike, to hurte others: but for feare rather that
others should hurte them. {defence+} And so, to cut of the excesse in
the one, and to supply the defect of the other: they were both
enforced to bring in a straunge manner of government. Furthermore,
touching their severall kinde of government, and dividing of their
people into states and companies: that of Numa was marvelous meane and
base, & framed to the liking of the meanest people, making a bodie of
a cittie, and a people compounded together of all sortes, as
goldesmithes, minstrells, founders, shoemakers, and of all sortes of
craftes men and occupations together. But that of Lycurgus, was
directly contrarie: for his was more severe and tyrannical, in
governing of the nobility, casting all craftes and base occupations
upon bondemen and straungers, and putting into the handes of his
cittizens the shield and launce, suffering them to exercise no other
arte or science, but the atte and discipline of warres, as the true
ministers of Mars: which all their life time never knewe other
science, but only learned to obey their captaines, and to commaund
their enemies. For to have any occupation, to buye and sell, or to
trafficke, free men were expressely forbidden: {trade+} bicause they
should wholy and absolutely be free. And all sciences to get money was
lawfull for slaves, and the ILOTES: being counted for as vile an
occupation, as to dresse meate, and to be a scullian of a
kitchin. Numa put not this difference amongest his people, but only
tooke away covetous desire to be riche by warres: but otherwise, he
did not forbid them to get goodes by any other lawfull meanes, neither
tooke any regarde to bring all to equalities and to be a like wealthy,
but suffered every man to get what he could taking no order to prevent
povertie which crept in, and spred farre in his cittie. Which he
should have looked unto at the beginning, at that time when there was
not too great an unequalitie amongest them, & that his cittizens for
substaunce were in manner equall one with another: for then was the
time when he should have made head against avarice, to have stopped
the mischieves and inconveniences, which fell out afterwards, and they
were not litle. For that only was the fountains and roote, of the most
parte of the greatest evills and mischieves, which happened
afterwardes in ROME. And as touching the division of goodes: neither
ought Lycurgus to be blamed for doing it, nor Numa for that he did it
not. For this equality unto the one, was a ground and foundation of
his common wealth, which he afterwards instituted: and unto other, it
could not be. For this division being made not long before the time of
his predecessour, there was no great neede to chaunge the first, the
which (as it is likely) remained yet in full perfection. As touching
mariages, and their children to be in common, both the one and the
other wisely sought to take awaye all occasion of jealousie: but yet
they tooke not both one course. For the ROMAINE husband, having
children enough to his contentation: if another that lacked children
came unto him, to praye him to lende him his wife, he might graunte
her unto him, and it was in him to geve her altogether, or to lende
her for a time, and to take her afterwardes againe. But the LACONIAN,
keeping his wife in his house, and the mariage remaining whole and
unbroken, might let out his wife to any man that would require her to
have children by her: naye furthermore, many (as we have told you
before) did them selves intreat men, by whom they thought to have a
trimme broode of children, and layed them with their wives. What
difference, I praye you was betwene these two customes? saving that
the custome of the LACONIANS shewed, that the husbands were nothing
angrie, nor grieved with their wives for those things, which for
sorrowe and jealousie doth rent the hartes of most maried men in the
world. And that of the ROMAINES was a simplicitie somwhat more
shamefast, which to cover it, was shadowed yet with the cloke of
matrimonie, and contract of mariage: confessing that to use wife and
children by halfes together, was a thing most intolerable for
him. Furthermore, the keeping of maidens to be maried by Numaes order,
was much straighter & more honorable for womanhed: and Lycurgus order
having to much scope and libertie, gave Poets occasion to speake, and
to geve them surnames not very honest. As Ibycus called them
Phanomeridas: to saye, thighe showers: and Andromanes: to saye
manhood. And Euripides sayeth also of them. Good nut broune girles
which left, their fathers house at large and sought for young mens
companie, & tooke their ware in charge: And shewed their thighes all
bare, the taylour did them wrong, on eche side open were their cotes,
the slytts were all to long. And in deede to saye truely, the sides of
their petticotes were not sowed beneath: so that as they went, they
shewed their thighes naked and bare. The which Sophocles doth easely
declare by these verses: The songe which you shall singe, shalbe the
sonnet sayde, by Hermione lusty lasse, that strong and sturdy mayde:
Which trust her petticote, about her midle shorte, and set to shewe
her naked hippes, in francke & frendly sorte. And therefore it is
sayed, the LACON Wives were bol- de, manly, and stowte against their
husbands, namely the first. For they were wholy mistresses in the
house, and abroade: yea they had law on their side also, to utter
their mindes franckly concerning the chiefest matters. But Numa ever
reserved the honour & dignitie unto the women, which was left them by
Romulusin his time, when their husbands, after they had taken them
awaye perforce, disposed them selves to use them as gentely as
possibly they could: nevertheles he added otherwise thereto great
honesty, & tooke awaye a curiositie from them, & taught them
sobrietie, & did inure them to speake litle. For he did utterly forbid
them wine, & did prohibite them to speake, although it were for things
necessarie, onles it were in the presence of their husbands. In so
much as it is reported, that a woman chauncing one daye to pleade her
cause in persone, openly before the judges: the Senate hearing of it,
did send immediately unto the oracle of Apollo, to know what that did
prognosticate to the cittie. And therfore Numa thought the memorie of
the naughty women, would much commend the great humilitie, gentlenes,
and obedience of the good. For like as our GRECIAN historiographers
doe note those which were the first that killed any of their
cittizens, or have fought with their brethern, or have killed their
fathers or mothers: even so the ROMAINES doe note that Spurius
Carvilius was the first which forsooke his wife, two hundred and
thirtie yeres after the first foundation of ROME, which was never done
by any before. And that the wife of one Pinarius, called Thalaea, was
the first which ever brawled or quarrelled with her mother in lawe
called Gegania in the time when Tarquine surnamed the prowde raigned:
so well and honestly were the orders of Numa devised concerning
mariage. Moreover, the age & time of marying of maydes, which both the
one and the other ordeined: doth agree with the rest of their
education. For Lycurgus would not that they should be maried, till
they were of good yeres, and women growen: to the ende that they
knowing the company of man at such time as nature requireth, it should
be a beginning of their pleasure and love, and not of griefe & hate,
when she should be compelled unto it before time agreable by nature,
and bicause their bodies also should be more stronge & able to beare
children, and to indure the mothers painefull throwes and travell in
childe bearing, considering they are maried to no other ende, but to
beare children. But the ROMAINES to the contrarie, doe marye them at
twelve yeres of age, and under: saying, that by this meanes their
bodies and manners be wholy theirs, which doe marye them, being
assured that no body els could touch them. By this reason it is
manifest, that the one is more naturall, to make them strong to beare
children: and the other more morall, to geve them the forme and manner
of conditions, which a man would have them to kepe all their life
time. Moreover touching orders for education of children, that they
should be brought up, instructed, and taught, under the selfe same
masters and governours, which should have an eye to make them drincke,
eate, playe, and exercise them selves honestly, and orderly together:
Numa made no more provision for the same, then the least maker of
lawes that ever was, and nothing in comparison of Lycurgus. For Numa
left the parents at libertie, to use their discretion (according unto
their covetousnes or necessitie) to cause their children to be brought
up as they thought good: whether they would put them to be labourers,
carpenters, founders, or minstrells. As if they should not frame the
manners of children, and facion them from their cradell all to one
ende: but should be as it were like passengers in one shippe, which
being there, some for one business other for another purpose, but all
to divers endes, doe never medle one with another, but in a rough
storme or tempest, when every man is affrayed of his owne life. For
otherwise, no man careth but for him selfe. And other makers of lawes
also, are to be borne withall, if any thing hath scaped them through
ignoraunce, or some time through lacke of sufficient power and
authoritie. But a wise philosopher, having receyved a realme of people
newly gathered together, which dyd contrary him in nothing: whereto
should he most plye his studie & indevour, but to cause children to be
well brought up, and to make young men exercise them selves, to the
ende they should not differ in manners, nor that they should be
troublesome, by their divers manner of bringing up, but that they
should all agree together, for that they had bene trained from their
childhood unto one selfe trade, and facioned under one selfe patterne
of vertue?  That good education, besides other commodities, dyd also
serve to preserve Lycurgus lawes. For the feare of their othe which
they had made, had bene of small effect, if he had not through
institution, and education (as it were) dyed in wolle the manners of
children, and had not made them from their nources brestes in manner,
sucke the Iuice and love of his lawes, and civill ordinaunces. And
this was of suche force, that for the space of five hundred yeres and
more, Lycurgus chief lawes and ordinaunces remained in full
perfection, as a deepe woded dye, which went to the bottome, and
pearced into the tender wolle. Contrariwise, that which was Numaes
chief ende and purpose, to continue ROME in peace and amitie, dyed by
and by with him. For he was no soner dead, but they opened both the
gates of the temple of Ianus, which he so carefully had kept shut all
his reigne, as if in deede he had kept in warres there, under locke
and keye, and they filled all ITALIE with murder and bloude: and this
his godly, holy, and just government which his Realme enjoyed all his
time, did not last long after, bicause it had not the bonde of
education, and the discipline of children which should mainteine
it. Why, maye a man saye to me here: hath not ROME, excelled still,
and prevailed more and more in chevalrie? This question requireth a
long aunswer, & specially unto such men, as place feficitie in riches,
in possessions, and in the greatnes of empire, rather then in the
quiet safety, peace, and concorde of a common weale: and in clemency
and justice, joyned with contentation. Nevertheles, howsoever it was,
that maketh for Lyurgus also, that the ROMAINES, after they had
chaunged the state which they had of Numa, dyd so marvelously increase
and growe mightie: and that the LACEDAEMONIANS to the contrarie, so
soone as they beganne to breake Lycurgus lawes, being of great
authoritie and swaye, fell afterwards to be of small accompt. So that
having lost the soveraintie and commaundement over GRECE, they stoode
in great hazarde also to be overthrowen for ever. But in trothe it was
some divine thing in Numa, that he being a meere straunger, the
ROMAINES dyd seeke him, to make him King, and that he could so chaunge
all, and rule a whole cittie as he lifted (not yet joyned togegether)
without neede of any force or violence: as it was in Lycurgus, to be
assisted with the best of the citty in resisting the commons of
LACEDAEMON, but he could never otherwise have kept them in peace, &
made them love together, but by his only wisdom and justice. The ende
of Numa Pompilius life.

The Life of Solon+

DIDYMVS the Grammarian, in a litle booke that he wrote and dedicated
unto Asclepiades touching tables of the lawes of Solon, alleageth the
wordes of one Philocles, in which he speaketh against the common
opinion of those that have written, that Solons father was called
Euphorion. For all other writers agree, that he was the sonne of
Execestides, a man but reasonably to live, although otherwise he was
of the noblest and most auncient house of the cittie of ATHENS. For of
his fathers side, he was descended of king Codrus: and for his mother,
Heraclides Ponticus writeth, she was cosin germaine unto Pisistratus
mother. For this cause even from the beginning there was great
friendshippe betwene them, partely for their kinred, and partely also
for the curtesie, and beawtie of Pisistratus, with whom it is re-
ported Solon on a time was in love. Afterwards they fortuned to fall
at jarre one with the other, about matter of state and government: yet
this square bred no violent inconvenience betwene them, but they
reserved in their hartes still their auncient amitie, which continued
the memorie of their love, as a great fire doth a burning flame. That
Solon was no ftayed man to withstand beawtie, nor any great doer to
prevaile in love, it is manifest to all, aswell by other poeticall
writings that he hath made, as by a lawe of his owne: wherein he dyd
forbid bondmen to perfume them selves, or to be lovers of
children. Who placed this lawe among honest matters, and commendable:
as allowing it to the better sorte, and forbidding it to the
basest. They saye also that Pisistratus selfe was in love with
Charmus, and that he dyd set up the litle image of love, which is in
Academia, where they were wont to light the holy candell. But Solons
father (as Hermippus writeth) having spent his goodes in liberalitie+,
& deedes of curtesie+, though he might easely have bene relieved at
divers mens handes with money, he was yet ashamed to take any, bicause
he came of a house which was wont rather to geve and relieve others,
{Bassanio+} then to take them selves: so being yet a young man, he
devised to trade+ marchaundise. {Antonio+} Howbeit other saye, that
Solon travelled countries, rather to see the worlde, and to learne:
then to trafflicke, or gayne. For sure he was very desirous of
knowledge, as appeareth manifestly: for that being nowe olde, he
commonly used to saye this verse: I growe olde, learning still. Also
he was not covetously bent, nor loved riches to much: for he sayd in
one place: Who so hath goodes, and golde enough at call, great heards
of beastes, and flocks in many a folde, both horse and mule, yea store
of corne and all, that maye content eche man above the mowlde: no
richer is, for all those heapes and hoordes, then he which bathe,
sufficiefitly to feede, and clothe his corpes, with such as god
afoordes. But if is joye, and chief delight doe breede, for to beholde
the fayer and heavenly face, of some swete wife, which is adornde with
grace: or els some childe, of beawty fayre and bright, then hath he
cause (in deed) of deepe delight. And in another place also be sayeth:
In deede I doe desire, some wealthe to have at will: but not unles the
same be got, by faithfull dealing still. For suer who so desires by
wickednes to thrive: shall finde that justice from such goodes, will
justly him deprive. There is no lawe forbiddeth an honest man, or
gentleman, greedily to scrape goods together, and more then may
suffice: and likewise to get sufficient to mainteine one withall, and
to defraye all needefull charges. In those dayes no state was
discommended, as sayeth Hesiodus, nor any arte or science made any
difference betwene men: but marchaundise they thought an honorable
state, {Antonio+} as that which delivered meanes, to traffike into
straunge and farre countries, to get acquaintaunce with states, to
procure the love of princes, and chiefly to gather the experience of
the world. So that there have bene marchaunts which heretofore have
bene founders of great citties: as he which first buylt MASSILIA,
after he had obteined the friendshippe of the GAVLES, dwelling by the
river of Rhosne. And they saye also, that Thales Milesius the wise,
did traffike marchaundise, and that Hippocrates the mathematike did
even so: and likewise that Plato travelling into Egipt, did beare the
whole charges of his jorney, with the gaines he made of the sale of
oile he caried thither. They remember also, that Solon learned to be
lavish in expence to fare delicately, and to speake wantonly of
pleasures in his Poemes, somwhat more licentiously then became the
gravity of a Philosopher, only hicause he was brought up in the trade
of marchaundise, wherein for that men are marvelous subject to great
losses and daungers, they seeke otherwiles good chere to drive these
cares awaye, and libertie to make much of them selves. Yet it
appeareth by these verses, that Solon accompted him selfe rather in
the number of the poore, than of the riche. Riche men (oftimes) in
lewdest lives doe range, and often seene, that vertuous men be poore:
Yet would the good, their goodnes never chaunge with lewd estate,
although their wealthe be more. For vertue stands allwayes, both firme
and stable: When riches rove, and seldome are durable. {fortune+} This
Poetry at the beginning he used but for pleasure, and when he had
leysure, writing no matter of importaunce in his verses. Afterwards he
dyd set out many grave matters of philosophie, and the most parte of
such things as he had devised before, in the government of a common
weale which he dyd not for historie or memories sake, but only of a
pleasure to discourse: for he sheweth the reasons of that he dyd, and
in some places he exhorteth, chideth, and reproveth the ATHENIANS. And
some affirme also he went about to write his lawes and ordinaunces in
verse, and doe recite his preface, which was this: Vouchesave O mighty
Iove, of heaven and earth highe King: to graunt good fortune to my
lawes, and heasts in everie thing. And that their glorie growe in such
triumphaunt wise, as maye remaine in fame for aye, which lives and
never dies. He chiefly delited in morall philosophie, which treated of
government and common weales: as the most parte of the wise men dyd of
those times. But for naturall philosophie, he was very grosse and
simple, as appeareth by these verses. The clattering hayle, and softly
falling snowe doe breede in ayer, and fall from cloudes on hye. The
dreadfull clappes, which thunderbolts doe throwe, doe come from
heaven, and lightninges bright in skye. The sea itselfe by boysterous
blastes dothe rore which (were it not provoked so full sore) Would be
both calme and quiet for to passe, as any element that ever was. So in
effect there was none but Thales alone of all the seven wise men of
GRECE, who searched further the contemplation of things in common use
among men, than he. For setting him a parte, all the others got the
name of wisdome, only for their understanding in matters of state and
government. It is reported that they met on a daye all seven together
in the cittie of DELPHES, and another time in the cittie of CORINTHE,
where Periander got them together at a feast that he made to the other
sixe. But that which most increased their glorie, & made their fame
most spoken of, was the sending backe againe of the three footed
stoole {tripos+} when they all had refused it, and turned it over one
to another with great humanitie.  For the tale is, howe certaine
fisher men of the Ile of Co, cast their nettes into the sea, and
certaine straungers passing by, that came from the cittie of MILETVM,
did buye their draught of fishe at adventure, before the net was
drawen. And when they drue it up, there came up in the net a three
footed stoole of massy gold, which men saye, Hellen (as she dyd
returne from TROYE) had throwen in in that place, in memory of an
auncient oracle she called then unto her minde. Thereupon the
straungers & fisher men first fell at strife about this three footed
stoole, who should have it: but afterwardes the two citties tooke
parte of both sides, on their cittizens behalfe. In so much as warres
had like to have followed betwene them, had not the prophetesse Pythia
geven a like oracle unto them both. That they should geve this three
footed stoole unto the wisest man. Whereupon the men of Co, sent it
first to Thales in the cittie of MILETVM as being willing to graunte
that unto a private persone, for which they had made warres with all
the MILESIANS before. Thales sayed, he thought Bias a wiser man than
him selfe: and so it was sent unto him. He likewise sent it againe
unto another, as to a wiser man. And that other, sent it also unto
another. {diffidence+} So that being thus posted from man to man, &
through divers handes in the ende it was brought backe againe unto the
cittie of MILETVM, and delivered into the handes of Thales the seconde
time: and last of all was caried unto THEBES, and offered up unto the
temple of Apollo Ismenian. Howbeit Theophrastus writeth, that first it
was sent to the cittie of PRIENA, unto Bias: and then unto Thales, in
the cittie of MILETVM, by Bias consent. And after that it had passed
through all their handes, it was brought againe unto Bias: and lastely
it was sent to the cittie of DELPHES. And thus much have the best and
most auncient writers written: saving that some saye in steade of a
three footed stoole, it was a cuppe that king Croesus sent unto the
cittie of DELPHES. Other saye, it was a pece of plate which Bathycles
left there. They make mention also of another private meeting betwext
Anacharsis and Solon, and of another betweene him and Thales, where
they recite, that they had this talke. Anacharsis being arrived at
ATHENS, went to knocke at SoIons gate, saying that he was a straunger
which came of purpose to see him, and to desire his acquaintaunce and
friendshippe. Solon aunswered him, that it was better to seeke
friendshippe in his owne countrie. Anacharsis replied againe: thou
then that arte at home, and in thine owne countrie, beginne to shew me
friendshippe. Then Solon wondering at his bolde ready wit, entertained
him very curteously: & kept him a certaine time in his house, and made
him very good cheere, at the selfe same time wherein he was most busie
in governing the common weale, and making lawes for the state
thereof. Which when Anacharsis understoode, he laughed at it, to see
that Solon imagined with written lawes, to bridell mens covetousnes
and injustice. For such lawes, sayed he, doe rightly resemble the
spyders cobwebbes: bicause they take holde of litle flies and gnattes
which fall into them, but the riche and mightie will breake and ronne
through them at their will. Solon answered him, that men doe justly
keepe all covenants and bargaines which one make with another, bicause
it is to the hinderance of either partie to breake them: and even so,
he dyd so temper his lawes, that he made his cittizens knowe, it was
more for their profit to obey lawe and justice, then to breake
it. Nevertheles afterwardes, matters proved rather according to
Anacharsis comparison, then agreable to the hope that Solon had
conceyved. Anacharsis being by happe one daaye in a common assembly of
the people at ATHENS, sayed that he marvelled much, why in the
consultations and meetings of the GRECIANS, wise men propounded
matters, and fooles dyd decide them. It is sayed moreover, that Solon
was somtime in the cittie of MILETVM at Thales house, where he saved
that he could not but marvell at Thales, that he would never marie to
have children. Thales gave him never a worde at that present: but
within fewe dayes after he suborned a straunger, which sayed that he
came but newly home from ATHENS, departing from thence but tenne dayes
before. Solon asked him immediately, What newes there? This straunger
whom Thales had schooled before, aunswered: none other there, saving
that they caried a young man to burial], whom all the cittie followed,
for that he was one of the greaiest mens sonnes of the cittie, and the
honestest man withall, who at that present was out of the countrie,
and had bene a long time (as they sayed) abroade. O poore unfortunate
father, then sayed Solon: and what was bis name? I have heard him
named, sayed the straunger, but I have forgotten him nowe: saving that
they all sayed, he was a worthy wise man. So Solon still trembling
more and more for feare, at every aunswer of this straunger: in the
ende he could holde no longer, being full of trouble, but tolde his
name him selfe unto the straunger, and asked him againe, if he were
not the sonne+ of Solon which was buried. The very same, sayed the
straunger. Solon with that, like a mad man straight beganne to beat
his head, and to saye, and doe, like men impacient in affliction, and
overcome with sorowe. But Thales laughing to see this pageant, stayed
him, and sayed. Loe, Solon, this is it that keepeth me from marying,
and getting of children: which is of such a violence, that thou seest
it hath nowe overcome thee, although otherwise thou arte stronge, and
able to wrestle with any. Howbeit for any thing he hath saied unto
thee, be of good cheere man, for it is but a tale, and nothing
so. Hermippus writeth, that Pataecus, (he which sayed he had Esops
sowle) reciteth this story thus. Nevertheles it lacketh judgement, and
the corage of a man also, to be afrayed to get things necessarie,
fearing the losse of them: for by this reckon- ing he should neither
esteeme honour, goodes, nor knowledge when he hath them, for feare to
lose them. For we see that vertue it selfe, which is the greatest and
sweetest riches a man can have, decayeth oftimes through sicknes, or
els by phisicke, and potions. Furthermore Thales selfe, although he
was not maried, was not therefore free from this feare, onles he would
confesse that he neither loved friends, kynsemen, nor countrie:
howbeit Thales had an adopted sonne, called Cybistus, which was his
sisters sonne. For our soule having in it a naturall inclination to
love, and being borne aswell to love, as to feele, to reason, or
understand, and to remember: having nothing of her owne whereupon she
might bestowe that naturall love, boroweth of other. AS where there is
a house or inheritaunce without lawfull heires, many times straungers,
and base borne children, doe creepe into the kinde affection of the
owner, and when they have once wonne and possessed his love, they make
him ever after to be kynde and tender over them. So that ye shall see
many times men of such a hard and rough nature, that they like not of
them that move them to marie, and get lawfull children: and yet
afterwardes are ready to dye for feare and sorowe, when they see their
bastardes (that they have gotten of their slaves or concubines) fall
sicke or dye, and doe utter wordes farre unmeete for men of noble
corage. And some such there be, that for the death of a dogge, or
their horse, are so out of harte, and take such thought, that they are
ready to goe into the grounde, they looke so pittiefully. Other some
are cleane contrarie, who though they have lost their children,
forgone their friendes, or some gentleman deare unto them, yet no
sorowfull worde hath commen from them, neither have they done any
unseemely thing: but have passed the rest of their life like wise,
constant, & vertuous men. For it is not love but weakness which
breedeth these extreme sorowes, and exceeding feare, in men that are
not exercised, nor acquainted to fight against fortune with
reason. {fortitude+} And this is the cause that plucketh from them the
pleasure of that they love and desire, by reason of the continuall
trouble, feare and griefe they feele, by thincking howe in time they
maye be deprived of it. Nowe we must not arme our selves with
povertie, against the griefe of losse of goodes: neither with lacke of
affection, against the losse of out friendes: neither with wante of
mariage, against the death of children: but we must be armed with
reason against misfortunes. Thus have we sufficiently enlarged this
matter. The ATHENIANS having nowe susteined a long and troublesome
warre against the MEGARIANS, for the possession of the Ile of
SALAMINA: were in the ende wearie of it, and made proclamation
straightly commaunding upon payne of death that no man should presume
to preferre any more to the counsaill of the cittie, the title or
question of the possession of the Ile of SALAMINA. Solon could not
beare this open shame, and seeing the most parte of the lustiest
youthes desirous still of warre though their tongues were tyed for
feare of the proclamation: he fayned him selfe to be out of his
wittes, and caused it to be geven out that Solon was become a foole,
and secretly he had made certaine lamentable verses, which he had
cunned without booke, to singe abroade the cittie. So one daye he
ranne sodainly out of his house a garland on his head, and gotte him
to the market place, where the people straight swarmed like bees about
and getting him up upon the stone where all proclamations are usually
made, out he singeth these Elegies he had made, which beganne after
this sorte. I here present my selfe (an Heraulde) in this case, which
come from Salamina lande, that noble worthy place. My minde in pelting
prose, shall never be exprest, But songe in verse Heroycall for so I
thincke it best.  This Elegie is intituled SALAMINA, and conteineth a
hundred verses, which are excellently well written. And these being
songe openly by Solon at that time, his friendes incontinently praysed
them beyond measure, & specially Pisistratus: and they went about
persuading the people that were present, to credit that he
spake. Hereupon the matter was so handled amongest them, that by and
by the proclamation was revoked, and they beganne to followe the
warres with greater furie then before, appointing Solon to be generall
in the same. But the common tale and reporte is, that he went by sea
with Pisistratus unto the temple of Venus, surnamed Coliade: where he
founde all the women at a solemne feast and sacrifice, which they made
of custome to the goddesse. He taking occasion thereby, sent from
thence a trusty man of his owne unto the MEGARIANS, which then had
SALAMINA: whom he instructed to fayne him selfe a revolted traytour,
and that he came of purpose to tell them, that if they would but goe
with him, they might take all the chief ladyes and gentlewoman of
ATHENS on a sodaine. The MEGARIANS easely beleeved him, & shipped
forthwith certaine souldiers to goe with him. But when Solon perceived
the shippe under sayle comming from SALAMINA, he commaunded the women
to departe, and in steade of them he put lusty beardles springalles
into their apparell, and gave them litle shorte daggers to convey
under their clothes, commaunding them to playe and daunce together
upon the sea side, untill their enemies were landed, and their shippe
at anker: and so it came to passe. For the MEGARIANS being deceyved by
that they sawe a farre of, as soone as ever they came to the shore
side, dyd lande in heapes, one in anothers necke, even for greedines
to take these women: but not a man of them escaped, for they were
slayne every mothers sonne. This stratageame being finely handled, &
to good effect, the ATHENIANS tooke sea straight, & costed over to the
Ile of SALAMINA: Which they tooke upon the sodaine, and wanne it
without much resistaunce. Other saye that it was not taken after this
sorte: but that Apollo Delphicus gave Solon first such an oracle. Thou
shalt first winne by vowes and sacrifice, the helpe of lordes and demy
goddes full bright: Of whose dead bones, the dust engraved lies, in
westerne soyle, Asopia that hight. By order of this oracle, he one
night passed over to SALAMINA, and dyd sacrifice to Periphemus, and to
Cichris demy goddes of the countrie. Which done, the ATHENIANS
delivered him five hundred men, who willingly offered them selves: and
the cittie made an accorde with them, that if they tooke the Ile of
SALAMINA, they should beare greatest authoritie in the common
weale. Solon imbarked his souldiers into divers fisher botes, and
appointed a galliot of thirtie owers to come after him, and he ankred
hard by the cittie of SALAMINA, under the pointe which looketh towards
the Ile of NEGREPONT. The MEGARIANS which were within SALAMINA, having
by chaunce heard some inckling of it, but yet knew nothing of
certaintie: ranne presently in hurry burley to arme them, and manned
out a shippe to descrie what it was. But they fondly comming within
daunger, were taken by Solon, who clapped the MEGARIANS under hatches
fast bounde, and in their roomes put aborde in their shippe the
choycest souldiers he had of the ATHENIANS, commaunding them to set
their course direct upon the cittie, and to keepe them selves as close
out of sight as could be. And he him self with all the rest of his
souldiers landed presently, & marched to encounter with the MEGARIANS,
which were come out into the fielde. Now whilest they were fighting
together, Solons men whom he had sent in the MEGARIANS shippe, entred
the haven, and wanne the towne. This is certainly true, and testified
by that which is shewed yet at this daye. For to keepe a memoriall
hereof, a shippe of ATHENS arriveth quietly at the first, and by and
by those that are in the shippe make a great showte, and a man armed
leaping out of the shippe, ronneth showting towardes the rocke called
Sciradion, which is as they come from the firme lande: and hard by the
same is the temple of Mars, which Solon built there after he had
overcome the MEGARIANS in battel, from whence he sent backe againe
those prisoners that he had taken (which were saved from the slaughter
of the battel) without any ransome paying. Nevertheles, the MEGARIANS
were sharpely bent still to recover SALAMINA again. Much hurte being
done and suffered on both sides: both parts in the ende made the
LACEDAEMONIANS judges of the quarrell. But upon judgement geven,
common reporte is, that Homers authoritie dyd Solon good service,
bicause he did adde these verses to the number of shippes, which are
in the Iliades of Homer, which he rehearsed before the judges, as if
they had bene in deede written by Homer. Ajax that champion stowte,
did leade with him in charge, twelve shippes from Salaminas soyle
which he had left at large, and even those selfe same shippes, in
battell did be cast and place in order for to fight, with enmies force
at last. In that same very place, whereas it seemed then the captaines
which from Athens came, imbattelled had their men. Howbeit the
ATHENIANS selves thinke, it was but a tale of pleasure: and saye that
Solon made it appeare to the judges, that Philaeus, and Eurysaces
(both Ajax sonnes) were made free denizens of ATHENS. Whereupon they
gave the Ile of SALAMINA unto the ATHIENIANS, and one of them came to
dwell in a place called Brauron, in the country of ATTICA: and the
other in a towne called MELITVM. And for due proofe thereof, they saye
there is yet a certen canton or quarter of the countrie of ATTICA,
which is called the canton of the Philaeides, after the name of this
Philaeus, where Pisistratus was borne. And it is sayed moreover, that
Solon (bicause he would throughly convince the MEGARIANS) did alleage
that the SALAMINIANS buried not the dead after the MEGARIANS manner,
but after the ATHENIANS manner. For in MEGARA they burie the dead with
their faces to the East: and in ATHENS their faces are towards the
West. Yet Hereas the Megarian denieth it, saying that the MEGARIANS
dyd burie them also with their faces towards the West: alleaging
moreover, that at ATHENS everie corse had his owne beere or coffin by
it selfe, and that at MEGARA they dyd put three or foure corses
together. They saye also there were certaine oracles of Apollo
Pythias, which dyd greatly helpe Solon, by which the god called
SALAMINA, IONIA. Their strife was judged by five Arbitrators, all
SPARTANS borne: that is to saye, Critolaidas, Amompharetus,
Hypsechidas, Anaxilas, and Cleomenes. Solon undoutedly wonne great
glory and honour by this exployte, yet was he much more honoured &
esteemed, for the oration he made in defence of the temple of Apollo,
in the cittie of DELPHES: declaring that it was not meete to be
suffered, that the CYRRHAEIANS should at their pleasure abuse the
sanctuarie of the oracle, and that they should ayde the DELPHIANS in
honour and reverence of Apollo. Whereupon the counsell of the
Amphictyons, being moved with his words & persuasions, proclaimed
warres against the CYRRHAEIANS: as divers other doe witnesse, and
specially Aristotle, in the storie he wrote of those that wanne the
Pythian games, where he ascribeth unto Solon the honour of that
determination. Nevertheles Hermippus sayeth, Solon was not made
generall of their armie, as Evanthes Samian hath written. For
AEschines the Orator wrote no such thing of him: and in the chronicles
of the DELPHIANS they finde, that one Alcmaeon, and not Solon, was the
generall of the ATHENIANS. Now the cittie of ATHENS had a long time
ben vexed & troubled through Cylons heynous offence, ever sence the
yere that Megacles (governour of the cittie of ATHENS) dyd with fayer
words handle so the confederates of the rebellion of Cylon, which had
taken sanctuarie within the liberties of the temple of Minerva: that
he persuaded them to be wise, and to present them selves be fore the
judges, holding by a threede, which they should tye about the base of
the image of the goddesse wher she stoode, bicause they should not
lose their libertie. But when they were come to the place of the
honorable goddesses so called(which be the images of the furies)
comming downe to present them selves before the judges, the threede
brake of it self. Then Megacles, and other officers his companions,
layed holde on them presently, saying that it was a manifest signe
that the goddesse Minerva refused to save them. So those they tooke,
and all they could laye hands of, were immediately stoned to death
without the cittie: the rest which tooke the altars for refuge, were
slaine there also. And none were saved, but such as had made meanes to
the governours wives of the citie, to intreate for them: which from
that time forth were ever hated of the people, and commonly called the
abjects and excommunicates. Who being the issues of the rebelles that
rose with Cylon, chaunced to rise again in credit, and growing to
great authorities they never left quarrelling and fighting continually
with offspring of Megacles. These factions+ were greatest and highest
in Solons time: who being of authorities and see- ing the people thus
divided in two partes, he stepped in between them, with the chiefest
men of ATHENS, and did so persuade and intreate those whom they called
the abjects and excommunicates, that they were contented to be
judged. So three hundred of the chiefest cittizens were chosen judges
to heare this matter. The accuser was Myron Phlyeian. This matter was
heard and pleaded, and by sentence of the judges, the excornmunicates
were condemned. Those that were alive, to perpetuall exile: and the
bones of them that were dead, to be digged up, and throwen out of the
confines of the territorie of ATHENS. But whilest the cittie of ATHENS
was occupied with these uprores, the MEGARIANS wiSely caught holde of
the occasion delivered, and set upon the ATHENIANS, tooke from them
the haven of NYSAEA, and recovered againe out of their handes, the Ile
of SALAMINA. Furthermore, all the cittie was possessed with a certen
superstitious feare: for some sayed, that sprites were come againe,
and straunge sightes were seene. The prognosticatours also sayed, they
perceived by their sacrifices, the dttie was defiled with some
abhominable and wicked things, which were of necessitie to be purged
and throwen out. Hereupon they sent into CRETA for Epimenides
Phaestian, whom they reckoned the seventh of the wise men, at the
least such as will not allowe Periander for one of the number. He was
a holy and devoute man, and very wise in celestiall things, by
inspiration from above: by reason whereof, men of his time called him
the newe Curetes, that is to saye, Prophet: and he was thought the
sonne of a Nymphe called Balte. When he was come to ATHENS, and growen
in friendshippe with Solon: he dyd helpe him much, and made his waye
for establishing of his lawes. For he acquainted the ATHENIANS to make
their sacrifices much lighter, & of lesse coste: & brought the
cittizens to be more moderate in their mourning, with cutting of
certaine severe & barbarous ceremonies, which the most parte of the
women observed in the mourning, and he ordeined certain sacrifices
which he would have done immediately after the obsequies of the
dead. But that which exceeded all the rest was, that by using the
cittizens unto holines & devotion, daylie sacrifices, prayers unto the
godds, purging of them selves, and humble offerings: he wanne mens
hartes by litle and litle, to yelde them more confirmable to justice,
and to be more inclined to concorde and unity. It is reported also
that Epimenides, when he saw the haven of Munychia, and had long
considered of it: told those about him, that men were very blinde in
foreseeing things to come. For if the ATHENIANS (sayed he) knew, what
hurt this haven would bring them: they would eate it (as they saye)
with their teethe. It is sayed also that Thales did prognosticate such
a like thing, who after his deathe commaunded they should burie his
bodie, in some vile place of no reckoning, with in the territorie of
the MILESIANS, saying that one daye there should be the place of a
cittie. Epimenides therfore being marvelously esteemed of every man
for these causes, was greatly honoured of the ATHENIANS, and they
offered him great presents of money and other things, but he would
take nothing, and only prayed them to geve him a boughe of the holy
olyve: which they graunted him, and so he returned shortely home into
CRETA. Nowe that this sedition of Cylon was utterly appeased in ATHENS
for that the excommunicates were banished the countrie: the citty fell
againe into their olde troubles and dissentions about the government
of the common weale: and they were devided into so divers partes and
factions, as there were people of sundry places and territories within
the countrie of ATTICA. For there were the people of the mountaines,
the people of the vallies, and the people of the sea coaste. Those of
the mountaines, tooke the common peoples parte for their lives. Those
of the valley, would a fewe of the best cittizens should carie the
swaye. The coaste men would, that neither of them should prevaile,
bicause they would have had a meane government, and mingled of them
both. Furthermore, the faction betwene the poore and riche, proceeding
of their unequalitie, was at that time very great. By reason whereof
the cittie was in great daunger, and it seemed there was no waye to
pacifie or take up these controversies, unles some tyraunt happened to
rise, that would take upon him to rule the whole. For all the common
people were so sore indetted to the riche, that either they plowed
their landes, and yelded them the sixt parte of their croppe: (for
which cause they were called Hectemorii and servants) or els they
borrowed money of them at usurie, upon gage of their bodies to serve
it out. And if they were not able to paye them, then were they by the
law delivered to their creditours, who kept them as bonde men and
slaves in their houses, or els they sent them into straunge countries
to be sold: and many even for very povertie were forced to sell their
owne children (for there was no lawe to forbid the contrarie, or els
to forsake their cittie and countrie, for the extreme cruelty & hard
dealing of these abominable usurers+ their creditours. Insomuch as
many of the lustiest and stowtest of them, banded together in
companies, and incoraged one another, not to suffer and beare any
longer such extremitie, but to choose them a stowte and trusty
captaine, that might set them at libertie, and redeeme those out of
captivity, which were judged to be bondmen and servants, for lacke of
paying of their detts at their dayes appointed: and so to make againe
a newe division of all landes and tenements, and wholy to chaunge and
turne up the whole state and go- vermnent. Then the wisest men of the
cittie, who sawe Solon only neither partner with the riche in their
oppression, neither partaker with the poore in their necessitie: made
sute to him, that it would please him to take the matter in hande, &
to appease & pacifie all these broyles and sedition. Yet Phanias
Lesbian writeth, that he used a subtiltie, whereby he deceived both
the one and the other side concerning the commonweale. For he secretly
promised the poore to devide the lands againe: and the riche also, to
confirme their covenants and bargaines. Howsoever it fell out, it is
very certain that Solon from the beginning made it a great matter, and
was very scrupulous to deale betwene them: fearing the covetousnes of
the one, and arrogancie of the other. Howbeit in the end he was chosen
governour after Philombrotus, and was made reformer of the rigour of
the lawes, and the temperer of the state and common weale, by consent
and agreement of both parties. The rich accepted him, bicause he was
no begger: the poore did also like him, bicause he was an honest
man. They saye moreover, that one word and sentence which he spake
(which at that present was rife in every mans mouthe) that equalitie
dyd breede no stryfe: did aswell please the riche & wealthie, as the
poore and needie. For the one sorte conceyved of this worde equalitie,
that he would measure all things according to the qualitie of the man:
and the other tooke it for their purpose, that he would measure things
by the number, and by the polle only. Thus the captaines of both
factions persuaded and prayed him, boldly to take upon him that
soveraigne authoritie, sithence he had the whole cittie nowe at his
commaundement. The neawters also of every parte, when they sawe it
very harde to pacific these things with lawe and reason, were well
content that the wisest, and honestest man, should alone have the
royall power in his handes. Some saye also that there was such an
oracle of Apollo. Sitt thou at helme, as governour to steere to guyde
our course, and rule the rowlings shippe, for thou shalt see full many
Athenians there, will take thy parte, and after thee will trippe. But
his familier friendes above all rebuked him, saying he was to be
accompted no better then a beast, if for feare of the name of tyranne,
he would refuse to takeu him a Kingdome: which is the most just and
honorable state, if one take it upon him that is an honest man. AS in
olde time, Tynnondas made him selfe King of those of Negrepont, with
their consent: and as Pittacus was then presently of those of
METELIN. Notwithstanding, all these goodly reasons could not make him
once alter his opinion. And they saye he aunswered his friendes, that
principalitie and tyrannie, was in deede a goodly place: howbeit there
was no way for a man to get out, when he was once entered into it. And
in certen verses that he wrote to Phocus, thus he sayed: I neither
blushe, nor yet repent my selfe, that have preservde, my native soyle
allwayes, and that therein (to hourde up trashe and pelfe) no tyrants
thought, could once eclypse my prayse. No might could move, my minde
to any wronge, which might beblot, the glory of my name: for so I
thought, to live in honour longe and farr excell all other men for
fame+. Hereby appeareth plainely, that even before he was chosen
reformer of the state, to stablish newe lawes: he was then of great
countenaunce and authoritie. But he him selfe writeth, that many sayed
of him thus, after he had refused the occasion of usurping of this
tyrranie+: Suer, Solon was a foole, and of a bashefull minde, that
would refuse the great goode happe, which goddes to him assignde. The
praye was in bis handes, yet durst he never drawe, the net therefore:
but alone abasht, and like a dastarde dawe. For had not that so bene,
he would (for one dayes raigne, to be a King in Athens tonne) him
selfe (all quicke) have slayen. And eke subverted quyte, his familie
withall, So swete it is to rule the roste, yclad in princely pall Thus
brought he common rumor to taber on his head. Nowe, notwithstanding he
had refused the kingdome, yet he waxed nothing the more remisse nor
softe therefore in governing, neither would he bowe for feare o the
great, nor yet would frame his lawes to their liking, that had chosen
him their reformer. For where the mischief was tollerable, he dyd not
straight plucke it up by the rootes: neither dyd he so chaunge the
state, as might have done, least if he should have attempted to turne
upsidowne the whole government, he might afterwards have bene never
able to settle and stablishe the same againe. Therefore he only
altered that, which he thought by reason he would persuade his
cittizens unto, or els by force he ought to compell them to accept,
mingling as he saied, sower with sweete, and force with justice. And
herewith agreeth his aunswer that he made afterwards, unto one that
asked him, if he had made the best lawes he could for the ATHENIANS?
yea suer, sayeth he, such as they were to receive. And this that
followeth also, they have ever since observed in the Athenian tongue:
to make certen things pleasaunt, that be hatefull, finely conveying
them under culler of pleasing names. AS calling whores, lemans: taxes,
contributions: garri- sons, gardes: prisones, houses. (euphemisms+} in
English, discharge. For the first chaunge and reformation he made in
government was this: he ordeined that all manner of detts past should
be cleere, and no bodye should aske his detter any thing for the time
past. That no man should thenceforth lende money out to usurie, upon
covenants for the bodye to be bounde, if it were not repayed. Howbeit
some write (as Androtion among other) that the poore were contented
that the interest only for usury should be moderated, without taking
away the whole dett: and that Solon called this easie and gentle
discharge, Seisachtheian, with crying up the value of money. For he
raised the pound of silver, being before but three score and thirtene
Drachmes, full up to an hundred: so they which were to paye great
summes of money, payed by tale as much as they ought, but with lesse
number of peces then the dett could have bene payed when it was
borowed. And so the detters gayned much, and the creditours lost
nothing. Nevertheles the more parte of them which have written the
same, saye, that this crying up of money, was a generall discharge of
all detts, conditions, and covenaunts upon the same: whereto the very
Poemes them selves, which Solon wrote, doe seeme to agree. For he
glorieth, and breaketh forth in his verses, that he had taken away all
bawkes and marcks, that separated mens lands through the countrie of
ATTICA: and that now he had set at libertie, that which before was in
bondage. And that of the cittizens of ATHENS, which for lacke of
payment of their dettes had bene condemned for slaves to their
creditours, he had brought many home again out of straunge countries,
where they had bene so long, that they had forgotten to speake their
naturall tongue: and other which remained at home in captivitie, he
had nowe set them all at good lbertie. But while he was a doing this,
men saye a thing thwarted him, that troubled him marvelously. For
having framed an Edict for clearing of all detts, and lacking only a
litle to grace it with words, and to geve it some prety preface, that
otherwise was ready to be proclaymed: he opened him selfe somewhat to
certaine of his familiers whom he trusted (as Conon, Clinias, and
Hipponicms) and tolde them how he would not medle with landes and
possessions, but would only cleere and cut of all maner of
detts. These men before the proclamation came out, went presently to
the money men, and borowed great summes of money of them, and layed it
out straight upon lande. So when the proclamation came out, they kept
the landes they had purchased, but restored not the money they had
borowed. This fowle parte of theirs made Solon very ill spoken of, &
wrongfully blamed: as if he had not only suffered it, but had bene
partaker of this wrong, & injustice. Notwithaanding he cleared him
self of this slaunderous reporte, losing five talents by his owne
lawe. For it was well knowen that so much was due unto him, and he was
the first that following his owne proclamation, dyd clearely release
his detters of the same. Other saye he was owing fifteene talents: and
among the same, Polyzelus the Rhodian is one that affirmeth
it. Notwithstanding they ever after called Solons friendes,
Greocopides, cutters of detts. This lawe neither liked the one nor the
other sorte. For it greatly offended the riche, for cancelling their
bondes: and it much more misliked the poore, bicause all landes and
possessions they gaped for, were not made againe common, and every
bodye a like riche and wealthie, as Lycurgus had made the
LACEDAEMONIANS. But Lycurgus was the eleventh descended of the right
line from Hercules, and had many yeres bene king of LACEDAEMON, where
he had gotten great authorities and made him self many friends: all
which things together, dyd greatly helpe him to execute that, which he
wisely had imagined for the order of his common weale. Yet also, he
used more persuasion then force, a good witnes thereof, the losse of
his eye: preferring a lawe before his private injuries which hath
power to preserve a cittie long in union and concorde, & to make
cittizens to be neither poore nor riche. Solon could not attain to
this, for he was born in a popular state, and a man but of meane
wealth: Howbeit he did what he could possible, with the power he had,
as one seeking to winne no credit with his cittizens, but onely by his
counsaile. Now, that he got the ill will of the more parte of the
cittie, by his proclamation which he made: he himself doth witnesse
it, saying: Even those which earst, did beare me frendly face, and
spake full fayer, where ever I them met: gan nowe beginne, to looke
full grym of grace, and were (like foes) in force against me set. AS
if I had done them, some spite or scorne, or open wronge, which were
not to be borne. Nevertheles he sayeth immediately after, that with
the same authoritie and power he had, a man possibly Could not
controll, the peoples mindes: nor still their braynes which wrought
like windes. But shortely after, having a feeling of the benefit of
his ordinaunce, & every one forgetting his private quarrell: they
altogether made a common sacrifice, which they called the sacrifice of
Seisachthia, or discharge, and chose Solon generall reformer of the
lawe, and of the whole state of the common weale, without limiting his
power, but referred all matters indifferently to his will. AS the
offices of state, common assemblies, voyces in election, judgements in
justice, and the bodie of the Senate. And they gave him also full
power and authorities to sesse and taxe any of them, to appointe the
number, what time the sesse shold continewe, and to keepe, confirme,
and disanull at his pleasure, any of the auncient lawes and customes
then in being. To beginne withall, he first tooke away all Dracons
bloudy lawes, saving for murder, and man slaughter, which were to
severe and cruell. For almost he dyd ordaine but one kinde of
punishment, for all kinde of faultes and offences, which was death. So
that they which were condemned for idleness were judged to dye. And
pety larceny, as robbing mens horteyards, and gardens of fruite, or
erbes, was as severely punished: as those who had committed sacriledge
or murder. Demades therefore encountered it pleasauntly, when he
sayed: that Dracons lawes were not written with incke, but with
bloud. And Draco him selfe being asked one daye, why his punishments
were so unequall, as death for all kinde of faultes: he
aunswered. Bicause he thought the least offence worthie so much
punishment: and for the greatest, he found none more grievous. Then
Solon being desirous to have the chief offices of the cittie to
remaine in riche mens handes, as already they dyd, and yet to mingle
the authoritie of government in such sorte, as the meaner people might
beare a litle swaye, which they never could before: he made an
estimate of the goodes of every private cittizen. And those which he
founde yerely worthe five hundred busshells of corne, and other
liquide fruites and upwards, he called Pentacosiomedimnes: as to saye,
five hundred busshell men of revenue. And those that had three hundred
busshells a yere, and were able to keepe a horse of service, he put in
the second degree, and called them knightes. They that might dispend
but two hundred busshells a yere, were put in the thirde place, and
called Zeugites. All other under those, were called Thetes, as ye
would saye, hyerlings, or craftes men living of their labour: whom he
dyd not admit to beare any office in the cittie, neither were they
taken as free cittizens, saving they had voyces in elections, and
assemblies of the cittie, and in judgements, where the people wholy
judged. This at the first seemed nothing, but afterwardes they felt it
was to great purpose: for hereby the most parte of private quarrells
and strifes that grewe among them, were in the ende layed open before
the people. For he suffered those to appeale unto the people, which
thought they had wrong judgement in their causes. Furthermore, bicause
his lawes were written somewhat obscurely, and might be diversely
taken & interpreted: this dyd geve a great deale more authoritie and
power to the judges. For, considering all their controversies could
not be ended, & judged by expresse lawe: they were driven of
necessitie allwayes to ronne to the judges, and debated their matters
before them. In so muche as the judges by this meanes came to be
somewhat above the lawe: for they dyd even expounde it as they would
them selves. Solon self doth note this equall division of the publicke
authorities in a place of his poesies, where he sayeth. Suche power
have I geven, to common peoples hande, as might become their meane
estate, with equity to stande:and as I have not pluct, from them their
dignitie, so have I not to much increast, their small authoritie. Unto
the riche likewise, I have allowed no more, then well might seeme (in
just conceit) suffcient for theirstore. And so I have for both
provided in such wise, that neither shalle eache other wrong, nor
seeme for to despise. Yet considering it was meete to provide for the
povertie of the common sorte of people: he suffered any man that
would, to take upon him the defence, of any poore mans case that had
the wrong. For if a man were hurte, beaten, forced, or otherwise
wronged: any other man that would, might lawfully sue the offendour,
and prosecute lawe against him. And this was a wise lawe ordeined of
him, to accustome his cittizens to be sorie one for anothers hurte,
and so to feele it, as if any parte of his owne bodie had bene
injured. And they saye he made an aunswer on a time, agreable to this
law. For, being asked what cittie he thought best governed: he
aunswered. That cittie where such as receyve no wronge, doe as
earnestly defend wrong offered to other, as the very wrong and injurie
had bene done unto them selves. He erected also the counsaill of the
Areopagites, of those magistrates of the cittie, out of which they did
yerely choose their governour: and he him self had bene of that
number, for that he had bene governour for a yere. Wherfore perceyving
now the people were growen to a stomake, and hawtines of minde,
bicause they were cleare discharged of their detts: he set one up for
matters of state, another counsell of an hundred chosen out of every
tribe, whereof foure hundred of them were to consult and debate of all
matters, before they were propounded to the people: that when the
great counsell of the people at large should be assembled, no matters
should be put forth, onles it had bene before well considered of, and
digested, by the counsell of the foure hundred. Moreover, he ordeined
the higher courte should have the chiefe authoritie and power over all
things, and chiefly to see the lawe executed and maintained: supposing
that the common weale being settled, and stayed with these two courtes
(as with two stronge anker holdes) it should be the lesse turmoyled
and troubled, and the people also better pacified and quieted. The
most parte of writers holde this opinion, that it was Solon which
erected the counsaill of the Areopagites, as we have sayed, and it is
very likely to be true, for that Dracon in all his lawes and
ordinaunces made no manner of mention of the Areopagites, but allwayes
speaketh to the Ephetes (which were judges of life and death) when he
spake of murder, or of any mans death. Not- withstanding, the eight
law of the thirtenth table of Solon sayeth thus, in these very
words. All such as have bene banished or detected of naughty life,
before Solon made his laws, shalbe restored againe to their goodes &
good name, except those which were condemned by order of the counsaill
of the Areopagites, or by the Ephetes, or by the Kings in open courte,
for murder, and death of any man, or for aspiring to usurpe
tyrannie. These wordes to the contrarie, seeme to prove and testifie,
that the counsell of the Areopdgites was, before Solon was chosen
reformer of the lawes. For howe could offenders and wicked men be
condemned, by order of the counsell of the Areopagites before Solon,
if Solon was the first that gave it authoritie to judge? onles a man
will saye peradventure, that he would a litle helpe the matter of his
lawes which were obscure and darke, and would supply that they lacked,
with expounding of the same by them. Those which shalbe founde
attainted and convicted of any matter, that hath bene heard before the
counsaill of the Areopagites, the Ephetes, or the governours of the
cittie when this lawe shall come forth: shall stand condemned still,
and all other shalbe pardoned, restored, & set at liberde. Howsoever
it is, sure that was his intent & meaning. Furthermore amongest the
rest of his lawes, one of them in deede was of his owne devise: for
the like was never stablished els where. And it is that lawe, that
pronounceth him defamed, and unhonest, who in a civill uprore among
the cittizens, sitteth still a looker on, and a neawter, and taketh
parte with neither side. Whereby his minde was as it should appeare,
that private men should not be only carefull to put them selves and
their causes in safety, nor yet should be careles for others mens
matters, or thincke it a vertue not to medle with the miseries and
misfortunes of their countrie, but from the beginning of every
sedition that they should joyne with those that take the justest cause
in hande, and rather to hazarde+ them selves with such, then to tarie
looking (without putting them selves in daunger) which of the two
should have the victorie. There is another lawe also, which at the
first sight me thinketh is very unhonest and fond. That if any man
according to the lawe hath matched with a riche heire and inheritour,
and of him selfe is impotent, and unable to doe the office of a
husband, she maye lawfully lye with any whom she liketh, of her
husbands nearest kinsemen. Howbeit some affirme, that it is a wise
made lawe for those, which knowing them selves unmeete to entertaine
wedlocke, will for covetousnes of landes, marye with riche heires and
possessioners, & minde to abuse poore gentlewoman under the colour of
lawe: and will thincke to force and restraine nature. For, seeing the
lawe suffereth an inheritour or possessioner thus ill bestowed, at her
pleasure to be bolde with any of her husbands kynne: men will either
leave to purchase such mariages, or if they be so careles that they
will nedes marye, it shalbe to their extreme shame and ignominie, and
so shall they deservedly paye for their greedy covetousness And the
lawe is well made also, bicause the wife hath not scope to all her
husbands kynsemen, but unto one choyce man whom she liketh best of his
house: to the ende that the children that shalbe home, shalbe at the
least of her husbands bloude and kynred. This also confirmeth the
same, that such a newe maryed wife should be shut up with her husband,
and eate a quince with him: and that he also which maryeth such an
inheritour, should of duety see her thryse a moneth at the least. For
although he get no children of her, yet it is an honour the husband
doth to his wife, arguing that he taketh her for an honest woman, that
he loveth her, and that he esteemeth of her. Besides, it taketh awaye
many mislikings and displeasures which oftentimes happen in such
cases, and keepeth love and good will waking, that it dye not utterly
betweene them. Furthermore, he tooke away all joynters and dowries in
other mariages, and willed that the wives should bring their husbands
but three gownes only, with some other litle moveables of small value,
and without any other thing as it were: utterly forbidding that they
should buye their husbands, or that they should make marchaundise of
mariages+, as of other trades to gaine, but would that man and woman
should marye together for issue, for pleasure, and for love, but in no
case for money. And for proofe hereof, Dionysius the tyranne of
SICILE, one daye aunswered his mother (which would needes be maried to
a young man of SYRACVSA) in this sorte. I have power (saieth he) to
breake the lawes of SYRACVSA, by having the Kingdome: but to force the
law of nature, or to make mariage without the reasonable compasse of
age, that passeth my reache and power. So is it not tolerable, and
much lesse allowable also, that such disorder should be in well
ordered citties, that such uncomely and unfit mariages should be made,
betweene coples of so unequall yeres: considering there is no meete
nor necessary ende of such matches. A wise governour of a cittie, or a
judge and reformer of lawes and manners, might well saye to an olde
man that should marye with a young mayde, as the Poet sayeth of
Philoctetes: Ah seely wretche, how trymme a man arte thou, at these
young yeres for to be maryed nowe? And finding a young man in an olde
riche womans house, getting his living by riding of her errants, and
waxing fat as they saye the partridge doth by treading of the hennes:
he maye take him from thence, to bestowe him on some young mayde that
shall have neede of a husband. And thus much for this matter. But they
great- ly commend another lawe of Solons, which forbiddeth to speake
ill of the dead. For it is a good and godly thing to thinke, that they
ought not to touche the dead, no more than to touche holy things: and
men should take great heede to offende those that are departed out of
this world, besides it is a token of wisedome and civillitie, to
beware of immortall enemies. He commaunded also in the selfe same
lawe, that no man should speake ill of the living, specially in
Churches, during divine service, or in counsaill chamber of the
cittie, nor in the Theaters whilest games were a playing: upon payne
of three silver Drachmes to be payed to him that was injured, and two
to the common treasurie. For he thought it to much shameles boldness
in no place to keepe in ones choller, and moreover, that such lacked
civillitie and good manners: and yet altogether to suppresse and
smother it, he knewe it was not only a harde matter, but to some
natures unpossible. And he that maketh lawes, must have regarde to the
common possibilitie of men, if he will punishe litle, with profitable
example, & not much without some profit. So was he marvelously well
thought of, for the lawe that he made touching willes &
testaments. For before, men might not lawfully make their heires whom
they would, but the goodes came to the children or kynred of the
testatour. But he leaving it at libertie, to dispose their goods where
they thought good, so they had no children of their owne: dyd therein
preferre friendship+ before kynred, and good will and favour before
necessitie and constrainte, and so made every one lorde and master of
his owne goodes. Yet he dyd not simply and a like allowe all sortes of
giftes, howsoever they were made: but those only which were made by
men of sound memories or by those whose wittes fayled them not by
extreme sickness or through drincks, medicines, poysonings, charmes,
or other such violence and ex- ordinarie meanes, neither yet through
the intisements and persuasions of women. AS thincking very wisely,
there was no difference at all betweene those that were evidently
forced by constraint, and those that were compassed and wrought by
subornation at length to doe a thing against their will, taking fraude
in this case equall with violence, & pleasure with sorowe, as passions
with madnes, which commonly have as much force the one as the other,
to drawe and drive men from reason. He made another lawe also, in
which he appointed women their times to goe abroade into the fieldes,
their mourning, their feastes and sacrifices, plucking from them all
disorder and wilfull libertie, which they used before. For he dyd
forbid that they should carie out of the cittie with them above three
gownes, and to take vittells with them above the value of an halfe
pennie, neither basket nor pannier above a cubite highe: and specially
he dyd forbid them to goe in the night, other then in their coche, and
that a torche should be caried before them. He dyd forbid them also at
the buriall of the dead, to teare and spoyle them selves with blowes,
to make lamentations in verses, to weepe at the funeralles of a
straunger not being their kinseman, to sacrifice an oxe on the grave
of the dead, to burie above three gownes with the corse, to goe to
other mens graves, but at the very time of burying the corse: all
which or the most parte of them, are forbidden by our lawes at this
daye. {mourning+} Moreover, those lawes appointe a penaltie upon such
women as offende in the same, to be distrayned for, by certaine
officers expressely named, to controll and reforme the abuses of
women, as womanish persones and faynte harted, which suffer them
selves to be overcome with such passions and fondnes in their
mourning. And perceyving that the cittie of ATHENS beganne to
replenish daylie more and more, by mens repayring thither from all
partes, and by reason of the great assured safetie, and libertie that
they founde there: and also considering howe the greatest parte of the
Realme became in manner heathy, and was very barren, and that men
traffeking the seas, are not wonte to bring any marchaundise to those,
which can geve them nothing againe in exchannge: he beganne to
practise that his cittizens should give them selves unto craftes and
occupations, and made a lawe, that the sonne should not be bounde to
relieve his father being olde, onles he had set him in his youth to
some occupation. It was a wise parte of Lycurgus (who dwelt in a
cittie where was no resorte of straungers, and had so great a
territorie as could have furnished twise as many people, as Euripides
sayeth, and moreover on all sides was environned with a great number
of slaves of the ILOTES whomi t was needefull to keepe still in labour
and worcke continually) to have his cittizens allwayes occupied in
exercises of feates of armes, without making them to learne any other
science, but discharged them of all other miserable occupations and
handy craftes. But Solon framing his lawes unto things, & not things
unto lawes, when he sawe the countrie of ATTICA so leane and barren,
that it could hardely bring forth to susteine those that tilled the
grounde only, and therefore much more impossible to keepe so great a
multitude of idle people as were in ATHENS: thought it very requisite
to set up occupations, and to geve them countenaunce and
estimation. Therefore he ordeined, that the counsaill of the
Areopagites, should have full power, and authoritie to enquier how
every man lived in the cittie, & also to punishe such as they found
idle people, and dyd not labour. But this was thought to severe and
straight a lawe which he ordeined (as Heraclides Pontilus writeth)
that the children borne of common harlotts and strumpets should not be
bounde to relieve their fathers. For he that maketh no accompt of
matrimonie, plainely sheweth that he tooke not a wife to have
children, but only to satisfie his lust and pleasure: {Gloucester+}
and so such an one hath his just reward, and is disapointed of the
reverence that a father ought to have of his children, since through
his owne faulte the birth of his childe falleth out to his
reproche. Yet to saye truely, in Solons laws touching women, there are
many absurdities, as they fall out ill favoredly. For he maketh it
lawfull for any man to kill an adulterer taking him with the
facte. But he that ravisheth or forcibly taketh awaye a free woman, is
only condemned to paye a hundred silver drachmes. And he that was the
Pandor to procure her, should only paye twenty drachmes. Onles she had
bene a common strumpet or curtisan: for such doe justefy open accesse,
to all that will hier them. Furthermore, he doth forbid any persone to
sell his daughters or sisters, onles the father or brother had taken
them, abusing them selves before mariage. Me thincketh it is farre
from purpose and reason, with severitie to punish a thing in one
place, and over lightly to passe it over in another: or to set some
light fine on ones head for a great faulte, and after to discharge
him, as it were but a matter of sporte. Onles they will excuse it
thus, that money being very harde and scante at that time in ATHENS,
those fines were then very great and grievous to paye. For in setting
out the charges of offerings which should be made in sacrifices, he
appointed a weather to be a convenient offering, and he setteth a
busshell of corne at a silver drachme. More he ordeined, that they
which wonne any of the games at ATHENS, should paye to the common
treasurie an hundred drachmes. And those that wonne any of the games
Olympicall, five hundred drachmes. Also he appointed that he which
brought a he woulfe, should have five drachmes, & him one drachme for
reward of a she woulfe. Whereof as Demetrius Phalerian writeth: the
one was the price of an oxe, and the other of a mutton. For, touching
the rates he ordeined in the sixtenth table of his lawes mete for
burnt sacrifices, it is likely he dyd rate them at a much higher
price, then ordinarilie they were worth: and yet notwithstanding, the
price whch he setteth, is very litle in comparison of that which they
are worth at this daye. Nowe it was a custome ever amongest the
ATHENIANS to kill their woulfes, bicause all their countrie laye for
pasture, and not for tillage. Some there be that saye, the tribes of
the people of ATHENS have not bene called after the names of the
children of Ion, as the common opinion hath bene: but that they were
called after their divers trades & manners of living, which they tooke
them selves unto from the beginning. For, such as gave them selves
unto the warres, were called Oplites: as who would saye, men of
armes. Those that wrought in their occupations, were called Ergades:
as much to saye, as men of occupation. The other two which were to say
husbandmen, & followed the plough, were called Teleontes: as you would
saye, labouring men. And those that kept beastes and cattell, were
called AEgicores: as much to saye, as heard men. Nowe, forasmuch as
the whole province of ATTICA was very drye, and had great lacke of
water, being not full of rivers, ronning streames, nor lakes, nor yet
stored with any great number of springs, insomuch as they are driven
there to use (through the most parte of the countrie) water drawen out
of welles made with mens handes: he made such an order, that where
there was any well within the space of an Hippicon, that every bodye
within that circuite, might come and drawe water onely at that well,
for his use and necessities Hippicon is the distaunce of foure
furlonges, which is half a mile: and those that dwelt further of,
should goe seeke their water in other places where they would. But if
they had digged tenne yardes deepe in their grounde, and could finde
no water in the bottome, in this case, they might lawfully goe to
their next neighbours well, and take a pot full of water conteining
six gallons, twise a daye: judging it great reason that necessitie
should be holpen, but not that idlenes should be cherished. He
appointed also the spaces that should be kept and observed by those,
that would set or plant trees in their ground, as being a man very
skilfull in these matters. For he ordeined, that whosoever would
plante any kynde of trees in his grounde, he should set them five
foote a sonder one from another: but for the figge tree and olyve tree
specially, that they should in any case be nine foote a sonder,
bicause these two trees doe spread out their branches farre of, and
they cannot stand neere other trees but they must needes hurte them
very much. For besides that they drawe awaye the same that doth
nourishe the other trees, they cast also a certaine moisture & steame
upon them, that is very hurtefull and incommodious. More he ordeined,
that whosoever would digge a pytte or hole in his grounde, he should
digge it as farre of from his neighbours pyt, as the pytte he digged
was in depth to the bottome. And he that would set up a hive of bees
in his grounde, he should set them at the least three hundred foote
from other hives set about him before. And of the fruites of the
earth, he was contented they should transporte and sell only oyle out
of the Realme to straungers, but no other fruite or graine. He
ordeined that the governour of the cittie should yerely proclaime open
curses against those that should doe to the contraries or els he him
selfe making default therein, should be fined at a hundred
drachmes. This ordinaunce is in the first table of Solons lawes, and
therefore we maye not altogether discredit those which saye, they did
forbid in the olde time that men should carie figges out of the
countrie of ATTICA, and that from thence it came that these picke
thanckes, which bewraye and ac- cuse them that transported figges,
were called Sycophantes. He made another lawe also against the hurte
that beastes might doe unto men. Wherein he ordeined, that if a dogge
did bite any man, he that ought him should deliver to him that was
bitten, his dogge tyed to a logge of timber of foure cubites longe:
and this was a very good devise, to make men safe from dogges. But he
was very straight in one lawe he made, that no straunger might be made
denizen and free man of the cittie of ATHENS, onles he were a banished
man for ever out of his countrie, or els that he should come and dwell
there with all his familie, to exercise some crafte or
science. Notwithstanding, they saye he made not this lawe so much to
put straungers from their freedome there, as to drawe them thither,
assuring them by this ordinaunce, they might come and be free of the
cittie: and he thought moreover, that both the one & the other would
be more faithfull to the common weale of ATHENS. The one of them,for
that against their willes they were driven to forsake their countrie:
and the other sorte, for that advisedly and willingly they were
contented to forsake it. This also was another of So-Ions lawes, which
he ordeined for those that should feast certen dayes at the towne
house of the cittie, at other mens cost. For he would not allow, that
one man should come often to feasts there. And if any man were invited
thither to the feast, and dyd refuse to come: he dyd set a fine on his
head, as reproving the miserable niggardlines of the one, and the
presumptuous arrogancy of the other, to contemne and despise common
order. After he had made his lawes, he dyd stablishe them to continewe
for the space of one hundred yeres, and they were written in tables of
wood called Axones, which were made more long then broade, in the
which they were graven: whereof there remaine some monuments yet in
our time, which are to be seene in the towne hall of the cittie of
ATHENS. Aristotle sayeth, that these tables were called Cyrbes. And
Cratinus also the Comicall poet sayeth in one place, of Solon and
Dracon: that Cyrbes was a vessell or panne wherein they dyd frye
millet or hirse. Howbeit others saye, that Cyrbes properly were the
tables, which contained the ordinaunces of the sacrifices: and Axones
were the other tables, that concerned the common weale. So, all the
counsels and magistrates together dyd sweare, that they would kepe
Solons lawes them selves, and also cause them to be observed of
others, throughly and particularly. Then every one of the Thesmothetes
(which were certaine officers attendaunt on the counsell, and had
speciall charge to see the lawes observed) dyd solemnly sweare in the
open market place, neere the stone where the proclamations are
proclaimed: and every of them, both promised, and vowed openly to
keepe the same lawes, and that if any of them dyd in any one pointe
breake the said ordinaunces, then they were content that such offender
should paye to the temple of Apollo, at the cittie of DELPHES, an
image of fine golde, that should waye as much as him self. Moreover
Solon seeing the disorder of the moneths, and the moving of the moone,
which followed not the course of the sunne, and used not to rise and
fall when the sunne doth, but oftetimes in one daye, it doth both
touche and passe the sunne: he was the first that called the chaunge
of the moone, Enecai nea, as much to saye, as olde and newe
moone. Allowing that which appeared before the conjunction, to be of
the moneth past: and that which shewed it self after the conjunction,
to be of the moneth following. And he was the first also (in my
opinion) that understoode Homer rightly, when he sayed: then beginneth
the moneth when it endeth. The day following the chaunge, he called
Neomenia, as much to saye, as the newe moneth, or the newe
moone. After the twenty day of the moneth which they called Icada, he
reckoned not the rest of the moneth, as increasing, but as in the
wane: and gathered it by seing the light of the moone decreasing
untill the thirtie day. Now after his lawes were come abroade, and
proclaimed, there came some daylie unto him, which either praised
them, or misliked them: and prayed him either to take awaye, or to
adde some thing unto them. Many againe came and asked him, howe he
understoode some sentence of his lawes: and requested him to declare
his meaning, and how it should be taken. Wherefore considering howe it
were to no purpose to refuse to doe it, and againe howe it would get
him much envie and ill will to yelde thereunto: he determined (happen
what would) to winde him selfe out of these bryars, and to flye the
gronings, complaints, and quarrells of his cittizens. For he sayeth
him selfe: Full harde it is, all mindes content to have, and specially
in matters harde and grave. So, to convey him self a while out of the
waye, he tooke upon him to be master of a shippe in a certaine voyage,
and asked licence for tenne yeres of the ATHENIANS to goe beyond sea,
hoping by that time the ATHENIANS would be very well acquainted with
his lawes. So went he to the seas, and the first place of his arrivall
was in EGYPT, where he remained a while, as he him self sayeth. Even
there where Nylus, with his crooked cranckes by Canobe falles into the
sea banckes. He went to his booke there, and dyd conferre a certaine
time with Psenophis Heliopolitan, and Sonchis Saitan, two of the
wisest priestes at that time that were in EGYPT: whom when he heard
rehearse the storie of the Iles ATLANTIDES as Plato writeth, he proved
to put the same in verse, and dyd send it abroade through GRECE. At
his departure out of EGYPT he went into CYPRVS, where he had great
curtesy and friendship of one of the princes of that countries called
Philocyprus, who was lorde of a prety litle cittie which Demophon
(Theseus sonne) caused to be built upon the river of Clarie, and was
of a goodly strong situation, but in a very leane and barren
countrie. Whereupon Solon tolde him, it would doe better a great deale
to remove it out of that place, into a very fayer and pleasaunt valley
that laye underneath it, and there to make it larger and statelier
then it was: which was done according to his persuasion. And Solon
self being present at it, was made overseer of the buildings, which he
dyd helpe to devise and order in good sorte, aswell in respect of
pleasure, as for force and defence: insomuch as many people came from
other places to dwell there. And herein many other lordes of the
countrie dyd followe th'example of this Philocyprus, who to honour
Solon, called his cittie SOLES, which before was called ZEPIA. Solon
in his Elegies maketh mention of this foundation, directing his wordes
unto Philocyprus, as followeth. So graunt the goddes, that thou, and
thine offspring maye clyme to great, and passing princely gate: long
time to live, in Soles florishing. And that they graunt, my shippe and
me good gate when I from hence, by seas shall take my waye: that with
her harpe, dame Venus doe vouchesafe to waft me still, untill she maye
conveye my selfe againe, into my country safe. Since I have bene, the
only meane and man, which here to build, this cittie first
beganne. And as for the meeting & talke betwext him & king Croesus, I
know there are that by distance of time will prove it but a fable, and
devised of pleasure: but for my parte I will not reject, nor condemne
so famous an historie, received & approved by so many grave
testimonies. Moreover it is very agreable to Solons manners and
nature, and also not unlike to his wisedom and magnanimitie: although
in all pointes it agreeth not with certaine tables (which they call
Chronicles) where they have busily noted the order and course of times
which even to this daye, many have curiously sought to correct, and
could yet never discusse it, nor accorde all contrarieties and
manifest repugnaunces in the same. Solon at the desire and request of
Croesus, went to see him in the cittie of SARDIS. When Solon was come
thither, he seemed to be in the selfe same taking that a man was once
reported to be: who being borne & bred up on the mayne lande, & had
never seene the sea neither farre nor neere, did imagine every river
that he sawe had bene the sea. So Solon passing alongest Croesus
palace, & meeting by the waye many of the lordes of his courte richely
apparelled, and carying great traines of serving men, and souldiers
about them: thought ever that one of them had bene the King, untill he
was brought unto Croesus selfe. Who was passing richely arrayed, what
for precious stones and juells, and for riche cullered silkes, layed
on with curious goldsmithes worke, and all to shewe him self to Solon
in most stately, sumptuous, and magnificent manner. Who perceiving by
Solons repayre to his presence, that he shewed no manner of signe, nor
countenance of woundring, to see so great a state before him, neither
had geven out any word neere or likely to that which Croesus looked
for in his owne imagination, but rather had delivered speaches for men
of judgement and understanding to know, how inwardly he much did
mislike Croesus+ foolish vanitie+ and base minde: then Croesus
commaunded all his treasuries to be opened where his golde and silver
laye, next that they should shewe him his riche and sumptuous
wardroppes, although that needed not: for to see Croesus selfe, it was
enough to discerne his nature and condition. After he had seene all
over and over, being brought againe unto the presence of the King:
Croesus asked him, if ever he had seene any man more happy than him
self was? Solon aunswered him, I have: and that was one Tellus a
cittizen of ATHENS, who was a marvelous honest man, and had left his
children behind him in good estimation, and well to live, and lastly,
was most happy+ at his death, by dying honorably in the field, in
defence of his countrie. {posterity+} Croesus hearing this aunswer,
beganne to judge him a man of litle witte, or of grosse understanding,
bicause he did not thincke that to have store of gold and silver, was
the only joye and felicitie of the world, and that he would preferre
the life and death of a meane and private man as more happy, than all
the riches and power of so mightie a King. Notwithstanding all this,
Croesus yet asked him again: What other man beside Tellus he had seene
happier than him self? Solon aunswered him, that he had scene Cleobis
and Biton, which were both brethern, and loved one another singularly
well, & their mother in such sorte: that upon a solemne festivall
daye, when she should goe to the temple of Juno in her coche drawen
with oxen: bicause they taried to long ere they could be brought, they
both willingly yoked them selves by the necks, and drue their mothers
coche in stead of the oxen, which marvelously rejoyced her, and she
was thought most happy of all other, to have borne two such
sonnes. Afterwards when they had done sacrifice to the goddesses and
made good cheere at the feast of this sacrifice, they went to bed: but
they rose not againe the next morning, for they were found dead
without suffering hurte or sorowe, after they had receyved so much
glorie and honour. Croesus then could no longer bridell in his
pacience, but breaking out in choller, sayed unto him: why, doest thou
recken me than in no degree of happy men? Solon would neither flatter
him, nor further increase his heate but aunswered him thus: O King of
LYDIANS, the godds have geven us GRECIANS all things in a meane, and
amongest other things chiefly, a base and popular wisedome, not
princely not noble: which, considering howe mans life is subject to
infinite chaunges, doth forbid us to trust or glorie in these worldly
riches. For time bringeth daylie misfortunes unto man, which he never
thought of, not looked for. But when the goddes have continued a mans
good fortune+ to his end, then we thinke that man happy and blessed,
and never before. Otherwise, if we should judge a man happy that
liveth, considering he is ever in daunger of chaunge during life: we
should be much like to him, who judgeth him the victorie before hande,
that is still a fighting, and maye be overcomen, having no suertie yet
to carie it away. After Solon had spoken these words, he departed from
the Kings presence, and returned backe againe, leaving king Croesus
offended, but nothing the wiser, not amended. Nowe Esope that wrote
the fables, being at that time in the cittie of SARDIS, and sent for
thither by the King, who entertained him very honorably: was very
sorie to see that the King had geven Solon no better entertainement:
so by waye of advise he said unto him. O Solon, either we must not
come to princes at all, or els we must seeke to please and content
them. But Solon turning it to the contrary, aunswered him: either we
must not come to princes, or we must needes tell them truely, and
counsell them for the best. {Cordelia+} So Croesus made light accompt
of Solon at that time. But after he had lost the battell against
Cyrus, and that his cittie was taken, him self became prisoner, and
was bounde fast to a gibbet, over a great stacke of wood, to be burnt
in the sight of all the PERSIANS, and of Cyrus his enemie: he then
cried out as lowde as he could, thryse together. O Solon. Cyrus being
abashed, sent to aske him, whether this Solon he only cried upon in
his extreme miserie, was a god or man. Croesus kept it not secret from
him, but sayed: he was one of the wise men of GRECE, whom I sent for
to come unto me on a certaine time, not to learne any thing of him
which I stoode in neede of, but only that he might witnesse my
felicitie, which then I dyd enjoye: the losse whereof is nowe more
hurtefull, than the enjoying of the same was good or profitable. But
nowe (alas) to late I know it, that the riches I possessed then, were
but words and opinion, all which are turned now to my bitter sorowe,
and to present and remediles calamitie. Which the wise GRECIAN
considering then, and foreseeing a farre of by my doings at that time,
the instant miserie I suffer nowe: gave me warning I should marke the
ende of my life, and that I should not to farre presume of my selfe,
as puffed up then with vaine glorie of opinion of happiness the ground
thereof being so slippery and of so litle suertie. These wordes being
reported unto Cyrus, who was wiser than Croesus, and seeing Solons
saying confirmed by so notable an example: he dyd not only deliver
Croesus from present perill of death, but ever after honoured him so
long as he lived. Thus had Solon glorie, for saving the honour of one
of these Kings: and the life of the other, by his grave and wise
counsaill. But during the time of his absence, great seditions rose at
ATHENS amongest the inhabitants, who had gotten them severall heades
{Lear+} amongest them: as those of the vallie had made Lyrurgus their
head. The coast men, Megacles, the sonne of Alcmaeon. And those of the
mountaines, Pisistratus: with whom all artificers and crafts men
living of their handie labour were joyned, which were the stowtest
against the riche. So that notwithstanding the cittie kept Solons
lawes and ordinaunces, yet was there not that man but gaped for a
chaunge, and desired to see things in another state: either parties
hoping their condition would mende by chaunge, and that every of them
should be better than their adversaries. The whole common weale
broyling thus with troubles, Solon arrived at ATHENS, where every man
did honour and reverence him, howbeit he was no more able to speake
alowde in open assembly to the people, nor to deale in matters as he
had done before, bicause his age would not suffer him: & therefore he
spake with every one of the heades of the severall factions a parte,
trying if he could agree and reconcile them together againe. Whereunto
Pisistratus seemed to be more willing then any of the rest, for he was
curteous, & marvelous fayer spoken, and shewed him selfe besides, very
good and pittiefull to the poore, and temperate also to his enemies:
further, if any good quality were lacking in him, he dyd so finely
counterfeate it, that men imagined it was more in him, than in those
that naturally had it in them in deede. AS to be a quiet man, no
medler, contented with his owne, aspiring no higher, & hating those
which would attempt to chaunge the present state of the common weale,
and would practise any innovation. By this arte and fine manner of
his, he deceyved the poore common people. Howbeit Solon found him
straight, and sawe the marke he shot at: but yet hated him not at that
time, and sought still to winne him, and bring him to reason, saying
oftetimes, both to him selfe, and to others. That who so could plucke
out of his head the worme of ambition+, by which he aspired to be the
chiefest, and could heale him of his greedy desire to rule: there
could not be a man of more vertue, or a better cittizen than he would
prove. About this time beganne Thespis to set out his tragedies, which
was a thing that much delited the people for the rarenes thereof,
being not many poets yet in number, to strive one against another for
victorie, as afterwards there were. Solon being naturally desirous to
heare and learne, and by reason of his age seeking to passe his time
awaye in sportes, in musicke, and making good cheere more then ever he
dyd: went one daye to see Thespis, who played a parte him selfe, as
the olde facion of the Poets was, and after the playe was ended, he
called him to him, and asked him: if he were not ashamed to lye so
openly in the face of the worlde. Thespis aunswered him, that it was
not materiall to doe or saye any such things, considering all was but
in sporte. Then Solon beating the grounde with his staffe he had in
his hande: but if we commend lying in sporte (quoth he) we shall finde
it afterwards in good earnest, in all our bargaines and
dealings. Shortely after Pisistratus having wounded him self, and
bloudied all his bodie over, caused his men to carie him in his coche
into the market place, where he put the people in an uprore, and tolde
them that they were his enemies that thus traiterously had handled and
arraied him, for that he stoode with them about the governing of the
common weale: insomuch as many of them were marvelously offended, and
mutined by and by, crying out it was shamefully done. Then Solon
drawing neere sayed unto him, O thou sonne of Hippocrates, thou doest
ill favoredly counterfeate the persone of Homers Ulysses: for thou
hast whipped thy self to deceive thy cittizens, as he did teare and
scratch him self, to deceive his enemies. Notwithstanding this, the
common people were still in uprore, being ready to take armes for
Pisistratus: and there was a generall counsell assembled, in the which
one Ariston spake, that they should graunte fiftie men, to cary
holberds and mases before Pisistratus for garde of his persone. But
Solon going up into the pulpit for orations, stowtely invayed against
it: and persuaded the people with many reasons, like unto these he
wrote afterwards in verse.  Eche one of you (O men) in private actes,
can playe the foxe, for slye and subtill craft But when you come,
yfore (in all your factes) then you are blinde, dull witted and
bedaft. For pleasaunt speache, and painted flatterie, beguile you
still, the which you never spye. But in the ende, seeing the poore
people dyd tumult still, taking Pisistratus parte, and that the riche
fled here and there, he went his waye also, saying: he had shewed him
selfe wiser than some, and hardier than other. Meaning, wiser than
those which sawe not Pisistratus reache and fetche: and hardier than
they which knewe very well he dyd aspire to be King, and yet
nevertheles durst not resist him. The people went on with the motion
of Ariston, and authorised the same, touching the graunte of
halberders: limiting no number, but suffered him to have about him and
to assemble, as many as he would, untill such time as he had gotten
possession of the castell. Then the cittie was marvelously affrayed &
amazed: and presently Megacles, and all those which were of the house
of the Alcmeonides dyd flye. Solon, who for yeares was now at his last
cast, and had no man to sticke unto him: went notwithstanding into the
market place, and spake to the cittizens whom he found there, and
rebuked their beastlines, and faynte cowardly hartes, and encouraged
them not to lose their libertie. He spake at that time notably, and
worthie memorie, which ever after was remembred. Before sayed he, you
might more easely have stayed this present tyrannie: but nowe that it
is already facioned, you shall winne more glorie, utterly to suppresse
it. But for all his goodly reasons, he found no man that would hearken
to him, they were all so amazed. Wherefore he hied him home againe,
and tooke his weapons out of his house, and layed them before his gate
in the middest of the streete, saying: For my parte, I have done what
I can possible, to help and defend the lawes and liberties of my
countrie. So from that time he betooke him selfe unto his ease, and
never after delt any more in matters of state, or commonweale. His
friends dyd counsell him to flye: but all they could not persuade him
to it. For he kept his house, and gave him selfe to make verses: in
which he sore reproved the ATHENIANS faults, saying: If presently your
burden heavy be: yet murmure not against the godds therefore. The
fault is yours as you yourselves maye see, which graunted have of
mightie mars the lore, to such as nowe, by your direction, doe holde
your neckes, in this subjection. His friends hereupon dyd warne him,
to beware of such speaches, and to take hede what he sayed: least if
it came unto the tyrannes eares, he might put him to death for it. And
further, they asked him wherein he trusted, that he spake so
boldly. He aunswered them, in my age. Howbeit Pisistratus after he had
obteined his purpose, sending for him upon his worde and faith, dyd
honour and entertaine him so well, that Solon in the ende became one
of his counsaill, and approved many things which he dyd. For
Pisistratus him selfe dyd straightly keepe, and caused his friends to
keepe Solons lawes. Insomuch as when he was called by proces into the
courte of the Areopagites for a murther, even at that time when he was
a tyrante: he presented him selfe very modestly to aunswer his
accusation, and to purge him selfe thereof. But his accuser let fall
the matter, and followed it no further. Pisistratus him selfe also dyd
make newe lawes: as this. That he that had bene maymed, and made lame
of any member in the warres, should be maintained all his life long,
at the common charges of the cittie. The selfe same was before decreed
by Thersippus (as Heraclides writeth) by Solons persuasion: who dyd
preferre it to the counsell. Pisistratus afterwards tooke holde of the
motion, and from thence forth made it a generall lawe. Theophrastus
sayeth also, it was Pisistratus, and not Solon, that made the lawe for
idlenes: which was the only cause that the countrie of ATTICA became
more fruitefull, being better manured: & the cittie of ATHENS waxed
more quiet. But Solon having begonne to write the storie of the Iles
ATLANTIDES in verse (which he had learned of the wise men of the
cittie of SAIS in EGYPT, and was very necessary for the ATHENIANS)
grewe wearye, & gave it over in mid waye: not for any matters or
busines that troubled him, as Plato sayed, but only for his age, and
bicause he feared the tediousnes of the worke. For otherwise he had
leysure enough, as appeareth by his verses where he sayeth: I growe
olde, and yet I learne still. And in another place where he sayeth,
Nowe Venus yeldes me swete delights, and Bacchus lends me comfort
still: the muses eke, refreshe my sprights, and much relieve my weary
will. These be the pointes of perfect ease, which all mens mindes
oftetimes doe please. Plato afterwards for beawtifying of the storie
and fables of the Iles ATLANTIDES, was desirous to dilate them out at
length, as if he would by waye of speache have broken up a field or
laye lande of his owne, or that this gifte had descended to him of
right from Solon. He beganne to raise up a stately fronte unto the
same, and enclosed it with high walles, and large squared courtes at
the entrie thereof: such was it, as never any other worke, fable, or
poeticall invention had ever so notable, or the like. But bicause he
beganne a litle to late, he ended his life before his worke, leaving
the readers more sorowfull for that was left unwritten, than they
tooke pleasure in that they founde written. For even as in the cittie
of ATHENS, the temple of Jupiter Olympian only remained unperfect: so
the wisdome of Plato (amongest many goodly matters of his that have
come abroade) left none of them unperfect, but the only tale of the
Iles ATLANTIDES. Solon lived long time after Pisistratus had usurped
the tyrannie, as Heraclides Ponticus writeth. Howbeit Phanias Ephesian
writeth, that he lived not above two yeres after. For Pistratus
usurped tyrannicall power in the yere that Comias was chief governour
in ATHENS. And Phanias writeth, that Solon dyed in the yere that
Hegestratus was governour, which was the next yere after that. And
where some saye, the ashes of his bodie were after his death strawed
abroade through the Ile of SALAMINA: that seemeth to be but a fable,
and altogether untrue. Nevertheles it hath bene written by many
notable authours, and amongegt others, by Aristotle the
philosopher. The ende of Solons life.

The Life of Publius Valerius Publicola+

NOWE we have declared what Solon was, we have thought good to compare
him with Publicola, to whom the ROMAINE people for an honour gave that
surname: for he was called before Publius Valerius, descended from
that auncient Valerius, who was one of the chiefest worckers and
meanes, to bring the ROMAINES & the SABYNES that were mortall enemies,
to joyne together as one people. For it was he that most moved the two
Kings to agree, and joyne together. Publicola being descended of him,
whilest the Kings dyd rule yet at ROME, was in very great estimation,
aswell for his eloquence, as for his riches: using the one rightly and
freely, for the maintenaunce of justice, and the other liberally+ and
curteously, for the relief of the poore. So that it was manifest, if
the Realme came to be converted into a publick estate, he should be
one of the chiefest men of the same. It chaunced that king Tarqutine+
surnamed the prowde, being come to the crowne by no good lawfull
meane, but contrarylie by indirect and wicked wayes, and behaving him
selfe not like a King, but like a cruell tyrante: the people much
hated and detested him, by reason of the death of Lucretia (which
killed her selfe for that she was forcibly ravished by him) and so the
whole cittie rose & rebelled against him. Lucius Brutus+ taking upon
him to be the head and captaine of this insurrection and rebellion,
dyd joyne first with this Valerius: who dyd greately favour and assist
his enterprise, and did helpe him to drive out king Tarquine with all
his house and familie. Nowe whilest they were thincking that the
people would chuse some one alone to be chief ruler over them, in
stead of a King: Valerius kept him selfe quiet, as yelding willingly
unto Brutus the first place, who was meetest for it, having bene the
chief authour and worcker of their recovered libertie. But when they
sawe the name of Monarchie (as much to saye, as soveraintie alone) was
displeasaunt to the people, and that they would like better to have
the rule devided unto two, & how for this cause they would rather
choose two Consuls: Valerius then beganne to hope, he should be the
seconde persone with Brutus. Howbeit this hope fayled him. For against
Brutus will, Tarquinius Collatinus (the husband of Lucretia) was
chosen Consul with him: not bicause he was a man of greater vertue, or
of better estimation than Valerius. But the noble men of the cittie
fearing the practises of the Kings abroade, which sought by all the
fayer and flattering meanes they could to returne againe into the
cittie: dyd determine to make such an one Consul, whom occasion forced
to be their hard and heavy enemie, persuading them selves that
Tarquinius Collatinus would for no respect yeld unto them. Valerius
tooke this matter grevously, but they had a mistrust in him, as if he
would not doe any thing he could, for the benefit of his countrie:
notwithstanding he had never any private injurie offered him by the
tytannes. Wherfore, he repaired no more unto the Senate to pleade for
private men, and wholy gave up to medle in matters of state: insomuch
as he gave many occasion to thincke of his absence, and it troubled
some men much, who feared least upon this his misliking and
withdrawing, he would fall to the Kings side, and so bring all the
ciittie in an uprore, considering it stoode then but in very tickle
termes. But when Brutus who stoode in jealousie of some, would by othe
be assured of the Senate, and had appointed them a daye solemnely to
take their othes upon the sacrifices: Valerius then with a good
cheerefull countenaunce came into the market place, and was the first
that tooke his othe he would leave nothing undone, that might
prejudice the Tarquines, but with all his able power he would fight
against them, and defend the libertie of the cittie. This othe of his
marvelously rejoyced the Senate, and gave great assuraunce also to the
Consuls, but specially, bicause his dedes dyd shortly after performe
his wordes. For there came ambassadours to ROME which brought letters
from king Tarquine, full of sweete and lowly speaches to winne the
favour of the people, with commission to use all the mildest meanes
they could, to dulce and soften the hardened harts of the multitude:
who declared how the King had left all pryde & crueltie, & ment to
aske nought but reasonable things. The Consuls thought best to geve
them open audience, and to suffer them to speake to the people. But
Valerius was against it, declaring it might perill the state much, and
deliver occasion of new sturre unto a multitude of poore people, which
were more affrayed of warres, then of tyrannie. After that, there came
other ambassadours also, which sayed that Tarquine would from
thenceforth for ever geve over and renounce his title to the Kingdome,
and to make any more warres, but besought them only, that they would
at the least deliver him and his friends their money and goods, that
they might have wherewithal to keepe them in their banishment. Many
came on a pace, and were very ready to yeld to this request, and
specially Collatinus, one of the Consuls who dyd favour their
motion. But Brutus that was a fast and resolute man, and very fierce
in his harte, ranne immediately into the market place, crying out that
his fellowe Consul was a traytour, and contented to graunt the
tyrannes matter, and meanes to make warre upon the cittie, where in
deede they deserved not so much, as to be relieved in their
exile. Hereupon the people assembled together, and the first that
spake in this assembly, was a private man called Gaius Minutius, who
speaking unto Brutus, and to the whole assembly, sayed unto them, O
noble Consul and Senate, handle so the matter, that the tyrannes goods
be rather in your custodie to make warre with them, than in theirs, to
bring warre upon your selves. Notwithstanding, the ROMAINES were of
opinion, that having gotten the liberty, for which they fought with
the tyrannes: they should not disapoint the offered peace, with
keeping backe their goodes, but rather they should throwe their goods
out after them. Howbeit this was the least parte of Tarquines intent,
to seeke his goodes againe: but under pretence of that demaund, he
secretly corrupted the people, and practised treason, which his
ambassadours followed, pretending only to get the Kings goodes and his
favourers together, saying, that they had already solde some parte,
and some parte they kept, and sent them daylie. So as by delaying the
time in this sorte with such pretences, they had corrupted two of the
best and aun- cientest houses of the cittie: to wit, the familie of
the Aquilians, whereof there were three Senatours: and the familie of
the Vitellians, whereof there were two Senatours: all which by their
mothers, were Consul Collatinus nephewes. The Vitellians also were
allied unto Brutus, for he had maried their owne sister, and had many
children by her. Of the which the Vitellians had drawen to their
stringe, two of the eldest of them, bicause they familiarly frequented
together, being cosin germaines: whom they had intised to be of their
conspiracie, allying them with the house of the Tarquines, which was
of great power, & through the which they might persuade them selves to
rise to great honour and preferment by meanes of the Kings, rather
than to trust to their fathers willfull hardness. For they called his
severitie to the wicked, hardnes: for that he would never pardone
any. Furthermore Brutus had fayned him selfe mad, {Hamlet+} and a
foole of long time for safety of his life, bicause the tyrannes should
not put him to death: so that the name of Brutus only remained. After
these two young men had geven their consent to be of the confederacie,
and had spoken with the Aquilians: they all thought good to be bounde
one to another, with a great and horrible othe, drincking the bloude
of a man, and shaking hands in his bowells, whom they would
sacrifice. This matter agreed upon betweene them, they met together
too put their sacrifice in execution, in the house of the
Aquilians. They had fittely pickt out a darcke place in the house to
doe this sacrifice in, and where almost no bodye came: yet it happened
by chaunce, that one of the servants of the house called Vindicius,
had hidden him selfe there, unknowing to the traytours, and of no set
purpose, to spye and see what they dyd, or that he had any manner of
inckling thereof before: but falling by chaunce upon the matter, even
as the traytours came into that place with a coun- tenaunce to doe
some secret thing of importaunce, fearing to be seene, he kept him
selfe close, and laye behinde a coffer that was there, so that he sawe
all that was done, and what they sayed and determined. The conclusion
of their counsell in the ende was this, that they would kill both the
Consuls: and they wrote letters to Tarquinius advertising the same,
which they gave unto his ambassadours, being lodged in the house of
the Aquilians, and were present at this conclusion. With this
determination they departed from thence, and Vindicius came out also
as secretly as he could, being marvelously troubled in minde, and at a
maze howe to deale in this matter. For he thought it daungerous (as it
was in deede) to goe and accuse the two sonnes unto the father (which
was Brutus) of so wicked and delestable a treason, and the nephewes
unto their uncle, which was Collatinus. On the other side also, he
thought this was a secret, not to be imparted to any private persone,
and not possible for him to conceale it, that was bounde in duety to
reveale it. So he resolved at the last to goe to Valerius to bewraye
this treason, of a special affection to this man, by reason of his
gentle and curteous using of men, geving easy accesse and audience
unto any that came to speake with him, and specially for that he
disdained not to heare poore mens causes. Vindicius being gone to
speake with him, and having tolde him the whole conspiracy before his
brother Marcus Valerius, & his wife, he was abashed and fearefull
withall: whereupon he stayed him least he should slippe awaye, and
locked him in a chamber, charging his wife to watche the doore, that
no bodie went in nor out unto him. And willed his brother also, that
he should goe and beset the Kings palace round about, to intercept
these letters if it were possible, and to see that none of their
servants fled. Valerius selfe being followed (according to his manner)
with a great traine of his friendes and people that wayted on him,
went straight unto the house of the Aquilians, who by chaunce were
from home at that time: and entring in at the gate, without let or
trouble of any man, he founde the letters in the chamber, where king
Tarquines ambassadours laye. Whilest he was thus occupied, the
Aquilians having intelligence thereof, ranne home immediately, and
founde Valerius comming out at their gate. So they would have taken
those letters from him by force, and strong hande. But Valerius and
his company dyd resist them, & moreover hudded them with their gownes
over their heads, & by force brought them (doe what they could) into
the market place. The like was done also in the Kings palace, where
Alarcus Valerius founde other letters also wrapt up in certaine
fardells for their more safe cariage, and brought away with him by
force into the market place, all the Kings servaunts he founde
there. There the Consuls having caused silence to be made, Valerius
sent home to his house for this bondman Vindicius, to be brought
before the Consuls: then the traytours were openly accused, and their
letters redde, and they had not the face to aunswer one worde. All
that were present, being amazed, honge downe their heads, and behelde
the grounde, and not a man durst once open his mouth to speake,
excepting a fewe, who to gratifie Brutus, beganne to say that they
should banishe them: and Collatinus also gave them some hope, bicause
he fell to weeping, and Valerius in like manner for that he held his
peace. But Brutus calling his sonnes by their names: come on (sayed
he) Titus, and thou Valerius, why doe you not aunswer to that you are
accused of and havin spoken thryse unto them to aunswer, when he sawe
they stoode mute, and sayed nothing: he turned him to the sergeants,
and sayed unto them. They are now in your handes, doe justice. So
soone as he had spoken these wordes, the sergeants layed holde
immediately upon the two young men, and tearing their clothes of their
backs, bounde their hands behinde them, and then whipped them with
roddes: which was such a pittiefull sight to all the people, that they
could not finde in their hartes to behold it, but turned them selves
another waye, bicause they would not see it. But contrariwise, they
saye that their owne father had never his eye of them, neither dyd
chaunge his austere and fierce countenaunce, with any pittie or
naturall affection towards them, but stedfastly dyd beholde the
punishement of his owne children, untill they were layed flat on the
grounde, and both their heads striken of with an axe before
him. {justice+} When they were executed, Brutus rose from the benche,
and left the execution of the rest unto his fellowe Consul. This was
such an acte, as men cannot sufficiently prayse, nor reprove
enough. For either it was his excellent vertue, that made his minde so
quiet, or els the greatnes of his miserie that tooke awaye the feeling
of his sorowe: whereof neither the one nor the other was any small
matter, but passing the common nature of man, that hath in it both
divinenes, and somtime beastly brutishnes. But it is better the
judgement of men should commend his fame, then that the affection of
men by their judgements should diminishe his vertue. For the ROMAINES
holde opinion, it was not so great an acte done of Romulus first to
build ROME: as it was for Brutus to recover ROME, and the best
libertie thereof, and to renewe the auncient government of the
same. When Brutus was gone, all the people in the market place
remained as they had bene in a maze, full of feare & wounder, and a
great while without speaking to see what was done. The Aquilians
straight grew bold, for that they sawe the other Consull Collatinus
proceede gently, and mildly against them: and so made petition they
might have time geven them to aunswer to the articles they were
accused of, and that they might have their slave and bondman Vindicius
delivered into their handes, bicause there was no reason he should
remaine with their accusers. The Consul seemed willing to yeld
thereto, and was ready to breake up the assembly thereupon. But
Valerius sayed, he would not deliver Vindicius (who was among the
assembly that attended upon his persone) and stayed the people besides
for departing awaye, least they should negligently let those escape
that had so wickedly sought to betraye their countrie. Untill he him
selfe had layed handes upon them, calling upon Brutus to assist him,
with open exclamation against Collatinus, that he dyd not behave him
selfe like a just and true man, seeing his fellowe Brutus was forced
for justice sake to see his owne sonnes put to death: and he in
contrary manner, to please a fewe women, sought to let goe manifest
traitours, and open enemies to their countrie. The Consul being
offended herewith, commaunded they should bring awaye the bondman
Vindicius. So the sergeants making waye through the prease, layed
handes upon him to bring him awaye with them, and beganne to strike at
them which offered to resist them. But Valerius friends stept out
before them, & put them by. The people showted straight, and cried out
for Brutus: who with this noyse returned againe into the market place,
and after silence made him, he spake in this wise. For mine owne
children, I alone have bene their sufficient judge, to see them have
the law according to their deservings: the rest I have left freely to
the judgment of the people. Wherefore (sayed he) if any man be
disposed to speake, let him stand up, and persuade the people as he
thinketh best. Then there needed no more wordes, but only to hearken
what the people cried: who with one voyce & consent condenmed them, &
cried execution, & accordingly they had their heades striken of. Now
was Consull Collatinus long before had in some suspition, as allied to
the Kings, and disliked for his surname, bicause he was called
Tarquinius: who perceyving him selfe in this case much hated and
mistrusted of the people, voluntarely yelded up his Consulshippe, and
departed the cittie. The people assembling then them selves, to place
a successout in his roome: they chose Valerius in his roome, without
the contradiction of any, for his faithfull travaill and diligence
bestowed in this great matter. Then Valerius judging that Vindicius
the bondman had well deserved also some recompence, caused him not
only to be manumised by the whole graunte of the people, but made him
a free man of the cittie besides: and he was the first bondman
manumised that was made cittizen of ROME, with permission also to geve
his voyce in all elections of officers, in any company or tribe he
would be enrolled in. Long time after that, and very lately, Appius to
currie favour with the common people, made it lawfull for bondmen
manumised, to geve their voyces also in elections, as other cittizens
dyd: and unto this daye the perfect manumising and freeing of bondmen,
is called Vindicta, after the name of this Vindicius, that was then
made a free man. These things thus passed over, the goodes of the
Kings were geven to the spoyle of the people, and their palaces were
rased and overthrowen. Nowe amongest other lands, the goodliest parte
of the field of Mars was belonging unto king Tarquine: the same they
consecrated forthwith unto the god Mars, and not long before they had
cut downe the wheat thereof. The sheaves being yet in shocks in the
field, they thought they might not grinde the wheate, nor make any
commoditie of the profit thereof. wherefore they threwe both corne and
sheaves into the river, and trees also which they had hewen downe and
rooted up, to the end that the field being dedicated to the god Mars,
should be left bare, without bearing any fruitc at all. These sheaves
thus throwen into the river, were caried down by the streame not farre
from thence, unto a forde and shallowe place of the water, where they
first dyd staye, and dyd let the other which came after, that it could
goe no further: there these heapes gathered together, and laye so
close one to another, that they beganne to sincke and settle fast in
the water. Afterwards the streame of the river brought downe
continually such mudde and gravell, that it ever increased the heape
of corne more and more in suche sorte, that the force of the water
could no more remove it from thence, but rather softly pressing &
driving it together, dyd firms and harden it, and made it growe so to
lande. Thus this heape rising still in greatnes and firmenes, by
reason that all that came downe the river stayed there, it grewe in
the ende, and by time to spread so farre, that at this daye it is
called the holy Ilande in ROME: in which are many goodly temples of
divers goddes, and sundry walkes about it, and they call it in Latine,
Inter duos pontes: in our tongue, betweene the two bridges. Yet some
write, that this thing fell not out at that time when the field of the
Tarquines was consecrated unto Mars: but that it happened afterwardes,
when one of the Vestall Nunnes, called Tarquinia, gave a field of hers
unto the people, which was hard adjoyning unto Tarquines field. For
which liberalitie & bowntie of hers, they dyd graunte her in
recompense many priviledges, and dyd her great honour besides. AS
amongest others, it was ordeined, that her word and witnes should
stand good, and be allowed, in matters judiciall: which priviledge,
never woman besides her self dyd enjoye. By speciall grace of the
people also, it was graunted her, that she might marie if she thought
it good: but yet she would not accept the benefit of that offer. Thus
you heare the reporte how this thing happened. Tarquinius then being
past hope of ever entring into his Kingdome againe, went yet unto the
THUSCANS for succour, which were very glad of him: and so they leavied
a great armie together, hoping to have put him in his Kingdome
againe. The Consuls also hearing thereof, went out with their armie
against him. Both the armies presented them selves in battell raye,
one against another, in the holy places consecrated to the goddes:
wherof the one was called the wodde Arsia, and the other the meadowe
Aesuvia. And as both armies beganne to geve charge upon eche other,
Aruns the eldest sonne of king Tarquine, and the Consul Brutus
encountered together, not by chaunce, but sought for of set purpose to
execute the deadly fode and malice they dyd beare eache other. The
one, as against a tyrante and enemie of the libertie of his countrie:
the other, as against him that bad bene chief authour and worker of
their exile and expulsion. So they set spurres to their horses, so
soone as they had spyed eche other, with more fury then reason, and
fought so desperately together, that they both fell starke dead to the
ground. The first onset of the battel being so cruee, the end thereof
was no lesse bloudy: until] both the armies having receyved and done
like damage to eche other, were parted by a marvelous great tempest
that fell upon them. Nowe was Valerius marvelously perplexed, for that
he knewe not which of them wanne the field that daye: seeing his
souldiers as sorowfull for the great losse of their men lying dead
before them, as they were glad of the slaughter and victorie of their
enemies. For, to viewe the multitude of the slaine bodies of either
side, the number was so equall in sight, that it was very hard to
judge, of which side fell out the greatest slaughter: so that both the
one and the other viewing by the eye the remaine of their campe, were
persuaded in their opinion, that they had rather lost then wonne,
conjecturing a farre of the fall of their enemies. The night being
come, such things fell out, as maye be looked for after so terrible a
battel. For when both campes were all layed to rest, they saye the
wodde wherein they laye incamped, quaked and trembled: and they heard
a voyce saye, that onely one man more was slaine on the THVSCANS side,
than on the ROMAINES parte. Out of doubt this was some voyce from
heaven: for the ROMAINES thereupon gave a shrill showte, as those
whose hartes receyved a newe quickening spirite or corage. The
THVSCANS on the contrarie parte were so affrayed, that the most parte
of them stole out of the campe, and scattered here and there: and
there remained behind about the number of five thousand men, whom the
ROMAINES tooke prisoners every one, and had the spoile of their
campe. The carkasses were viewed afterwards, and they found that there
were slaine in that battell, eleven thousand and three hundred of the
THVSCANS: and of the ROMAINES, so many saving one. This battel was
fought (as they saye) the last daye of Februarie, and the Consul
Valerius triumphed, being the first of the Consuls that ever entered
into ROME triumphing upon a charet drawen with foure horses, which
sight the people found honorable and goodly to beholde, and were not
offended withall (as some seeme to reporte) nor yet dyd envy him for
that he beganne it. For if it had bene so, that custome had not bene
followed with so good acceptation, nor had continued so many yeres as
it dyd afterwards. They much commended also the honour he dyd to his
fellowe Consul Brutus, in setting out his funeralles and obsequies, at
the which he made a funerall oration in his praise. They did so like
and please the ROMAINES, that they have ever since continued that
custome at the buriall of any noble man, or great personage, that he
is openly praised at his buriall, by the worthiest man that liveth
among them. They reporte this funerall oration is farre more auncient
then the first, that was made in GRECE in the like case: onles they
will confirme that which the orator Anaximenes hath written, that the
manner of praising the dead at their funeralls, was first of all
instituted by Solon. But they dyd most envye Valerius, and beare him
grudge, bicause Brutus (whom the people did acknowledge for father of
their libertie) would never be alone in office, but had procured
twise, that they should appoint Valerius fellowe Consul with him. This
man in contrariwise (sayed the people) taking upon him alone the rule
and soveraintie, sheweth plainely he will not be Brutus successour in
his Consulshippe, but Tarquinius self in the Kingdome. For to great
purpose was it to praise Brutus in wordes, and to followe Tarquinius
in deedes: having borne before him selfe only all the mases, the axes
and the roddes, when he cometh abroade out of his owne house, which is
farre greater, and more stately, then the Kings palace which he him
self overthrewe. And to saye truely, Valerius dwelt in a house a litle
to sumptuously built and seated, upon the hanging of the hill called
mount Velia: & bicause it fsoode highe, it overlooked all the market
place, so that any man might easely see from thence what was done
there. Furthermore, it was very ill to come to it: but when he came
out of his house, it was a marvelous pompe and state to see him come
downe from so highe a place, and with a traine after him, that caried
the majestie of a Kings courte. But herein Valerius left a noble
example, shewing howe much it importeth a noble man and magistrate,
ruling weighty causes, to have his eares open to heare, and willingly
to receyve free speache in steade of flatteries+, and playne trothe in
place of lyes. {Hal+} For, being enformed by some of his friends how
the people misliked and complained of it, he stoode not in his owne
conceit, neither was angrie with them: but forthwith set a worlde of
workmen upon it, earely in the morning before breake of daye, and
commaunded them to plucke down his house, and to rase it to the
ground. Insomuch as the next day following, when the ROMAINES were
gathered together in the market place, and sawe this great sodaine
ruine, they much commended the noble acte and minde of Valerius, in
doing that he dyd: but so were they angrie, and sorie both, to see so
fayer and stately a buylt house (which was an ornament to the cittie)
overthrowen upon a sodaine. Much like in comparison to a man, whom
through spite and envie they had unjusdy put to death: & to see their
chief magistrate also like a straunger and a vagabonde, compelled to
seeke his lodging in another mans house. For his friends receyved him
into their houses, untill such time as the people had geven him a
place, where they dyd build him a newe house, farre more orderly, and
nothing so stately and curious as the first was, and it was in the
same place, where the temple called Vicus Publicus standeth at this
daye. Nowe bicause he would not only reforme his persone, but the
office of his Consulshippe, and also would frame him selfe to the good
acceptation and liking of the people: where before he seemed unto them
to be fearefull, he put awaye the carying of the axes from the roddes,
which the sergeants used to beare before the Consul. Moreover when he
came into the market place, where the people were assembled, he caused
the roddes to be borne downewardes, as in token of reverence of the
soveraine majestie of the people: which all the magistrates observe
yet at this daye. Nowe in all this humble showe and lowlines of his,
he dyd not so much imbase his dignitie and greatness which the common
people thought him to have at the first: as he dyd thereby cut of
envie from him, winning againe as much true authoritie, as in
semblaunce he would seeme to have lost. For this made the people
willinger to obey, and readier to submit them selves unto him:
insomuch as upon this occasion he was surnamed Publicola, as much to
saye, as the people pleaser. Which surname he kept ever after, and we
from henceforth also writing the rest of his life, will use no other
name: for he was contented to suffer any man that would, to offer him
selfe to aske the Consulshippe in Brutus place. But he yet not knowing
what kynde of man they would joyne fellowe Consul with him, and
fearing least through envie or ignoraunce, the party might thwart his
purpose and meaning: employed his sole power and authoritie whilest he
ruled alone, upon highe and noble attempts. For first of all he
supplied up the number of Senatours that were greatly decayed, bicause
king Tarquine had put some of them to death not long before, and other
also had bene lately slaine in the warres: in whose places he had
chosen newe Senatours, to the number of a hundred three score and
foure. After that, he made newe decrees & lawes, which greatly dyd
advaunce the authoritie of the people. The first lawe gave libertie to
all offendours, condemned by judgement of the Consuls, to appeale unto
the people. The second, that no man upon payne of death should take
upon him the exercise of any office, unles he had come unto it by the
gifte of the people. The third was, and all in favour of the poore,
that the poore cittizens of ROME should paye no more custome, nor any
impost whatsoever. This made every man the more willing to geve him
selfe to some crafte or occupation, when he sawe his travaill should
not be taxed, nor taken from him. AS for the law that he made against
those that disobeyed the Consuls, it was founde to be so favorable to
the communaltie, as they thought it was rather made for the poore,
than for the riche and great men. For the offendours and breakers of
that lawe, were condemned to paye for a penalties the value of five
oxen, and two mut- tons. The price of a mutton was then, tenne oboles,
and of an oxe, a hundred oboles. For in those dayes, the ROMAINES had
no store of coined mony, otherwise, they lacked no sheepe, nor other
rother beasts. Hereof it came, that to this da@e they call their
riches or substaunce, Peculium, bicause Pecus signifieth sheepe and
muttons. And in the olde time the stampe upon their money was an oxe,
a mutton, or a hogge: and some of them called their children Bubulci,
which signifieth cowheards: others Caprarii, to saye goateheards: &
others Porcii, as you would saye, swineheardes. Nowe though in all his
other lawes, he was very favorable and temperate toward the people:
yet in that moderation, somtimes he dyd set grievous paynes and
punishements. For he made it lawfull to kill any man without any
accusation, that dyd aspire to the Kingdome, and he dyd set the
murderer free of all punishement: {tyrant+} so he brought forth
manifest proofe, that the party slaine, had practised to make him
selfe King. AS being impossible a man should pretend so great a
matter, and no man should finde it: and contrariwise being possible,
albeit he were spyed, that otherwise he might attempt it, by making
him selfe so strong, that he needed not passe for the law. In this
case he gave every man libertie by such acte or meane, to prevent him
if he could of discretion: who by strength otherwise sought to aspire
to reigne. They greatly commended him also for the lawe that he made
touching the treasure. For being very necessarie that everie private
cittizen should according to his abilitie, be contributer to the
charges and maintenaunce of the warres: he him self would neither take
such collection into his charge, nor suffer any man of his to medle
with the same, nor yet that it should be layed in any private mans
house, but he dyd ordeine that Saturnes temple should be the treasurie
thereof. This order they keepe to this present daye. Furthermore, he
graunted the people to chuse two young men Quaestores of the same, as
you would saye the treasurers, to take the charge of this money: and
the two first which were chosen, were Publius Veturius, and Marcus
Minutius, who gathered great summes of money together. For numbring
the people by the polle, there were found a hundred & thirtie thousand
persones which had payed subsidie, not reckoning in this accompt,
orphanes, nor widowes, which were excepted from all payments. After he
had estabeshed all these things, he caused Lucretius (the father of
Lucretia) to be chosen fellowe Consul with him, unto whom, for that he
was his auncient, he gave the upper hande, and commaunded they should
carie before him the roddes, which were the signes of the chief
magistrate: and ever since they have geven this honour unto age. But
Lucretius dying not long after his election, they chose againe in his
place Marcus Horatius, who held out the Consulshippe with Publicola
the rest of the yere. Nowe about that time king Tarquine remained in
the countrie of THVSCANE, where he prepared a seconde armie against
the ROMAINES, and there fell out a marvelous straunge thing
thereupon. For when he raigned king of ROME, he had almost made an
ende of the building of the temple of Jupiter Capitolin, & was
determined (whether by any oracle receyved, or upon any fantasy it is
not knowen) to set up a coche of earth baked by a potter, in the
highest place of the temple, and he put it out to be done by cettaine
THVSCAN workemen of the cittie of VEIES: but whiles they were in hand
with the worcke, he was driven out of his Realme. When the worckemen
had formed this coche, and that they had put it into the fournes to
bake it, it fell out contrarie to the nature of the earth, and the
common order of their worcke put into the fournes. For the earth dyd
not shut & close together in the fire, nor dryed up all the moisture
thereof. but rather to the contrarie it dyd swell to such a bignes,
and grewe so harde and strong withall, that they were driven to breake
up the head and walles of the fournes to get it out. The soothesayers
dyd expounde this, that it was a celestiall token from above, and
promised great prosperitie & increase of power unto those, that should
enjoye this coche. Whereupon the VEIANS resolved not to deliver it
unto the ROMAINES that demaunded it, but aunswered that it dyd be]ong
unto king Tarquine, and not unto those that had banished him. Not many
dayes after, there was a solemne feast of games for running of horses
in the cittie of VEIES, where they dyd also many other notable actes,
worthy sight according to their custome. But after the game was
played, he that had wonne the bell, being crowned in token of victorie
as they dyd use at that time, brought his coche and horses fayer and
softely out of the showe place: and sodainely the horse being affrayed
upon no present cause or occasion seene, whether it was by chaunce, or
by some secret working from above, ranne as they had bene mad with
their coche to the cittie of ROME. The coche driver dyd what he could
possible at the first to staye them, by holding in the raynes, by
clapping them on the backs, and speaking gently to them: but in the
ende, perceyving he could doe no good, & that they would have their
swynge, he gave place to their furie, & they never linne ronning, till
they brought him neere to the Capitoll, where they overthrewe him and
his coche, not farre from the gate called at this present,
Ratumena. The VEIANS woundering much at this matter, and being
affrayed withall: were contented the workmen should deliver their
coche made of earth unto the ROMAINES. Now concerning Jupiter
Capitolins temple, king Tarquine the first (Which was the sonne of
Demaratus) vowed in the warres that he made against the SABYNES, that
he would buyld it. And Tar- quine the prowde, being the sonne of him
that made this vowe dyd buyld it: howbeit he dyd not consecrate it,
bicause he was driven out of his Kingdome before he had finished
it. When this temple was built and throughly finished, and set forth
with all his ornaments: Publicola was marvelously desirous to have the
honour of the dedication thereof. But the noble men and Senatours
envying his glorie, being very angrie that he could not content him
selfe with all those honours that he had receyved in peace, for the
good lawes he had made, and in warres for the victories he had
obteined and well deserved, but further that he would seeke the honour
of this dedication, which nothing dyd pertaine unto him: they then dyd
egge Horatius, and persuaded him to make sute for the same. Occasion
fell out at that time, that Publicola must have the leading of the
ROMAINES armie into the field: in the meane time, while Publicola was
absent, it was procured that the people gave their voyces to Horatius,
to consecrate the temple, knowing they could not so well have brought
it to passe he being present. Other saye, the Consuls drewe lotts
betweene them, and that it lighted upon Publicola to leade the armie
against his will, and upon Horatius to consecrate this temple, which
maye be conjectured by the thing that fortuned in the dedication
thereof. For all the people being assembled together in the Capitoll
with great silence, on the fiftenth daye of the moneth of September,
which is about the newe moone of the moneth which the GRECIANS call
Metagitnion: Horatius having done all the ceremonies needefull in such
a case, and holding then the doores of the temple, as the use was even
to utter the solenme wordes of dedication: Marcus Valerius, the
brother of Publicola, having stoode a long time there at the temple
doore, to take an oportunitie to speake, beganne to say alowde in this
wise. My lorde Consul, your sonne is dead of a sicknes in the
campe. This made all the assembly sorie to heare it, but it nothing
amased Horatius, who spake only this muche. Cast his bodie then where
you will for me, the thought is taken. So he continued on to ende his
consecration. This was but a devise and nothing true, of Marcus
Valerius, only to make Horatius leave of his consecration. Horatius in
this shewed him selfe a marvelous resolute man, were it that he
streight founde his devise, or that he beleeved it to be true: for the
sodainenes of the matter nothing altered him. The very like matter
fell out in consecrating of the second temple. For this first which
Tarquine had built and Horatius consecrated, was consumed by fyer in
the civill warres: and the second was built up againe by Sylla, who
made no dedication of it. For Catulus set up the superscription of the
dedication, bicause Sylla dyed before he could dedicate it. The second
temple was burnt againe not long after the troubles and tumultes which
were at ROME, under Vitellius the Emperour. The third in like manner
was reedified and built againe by Vespasian, from the ground to the
toppe. But this good happe he had above other: to see his worke
perfited and finished before his death, and not overthrowen as it was
immediately after his death. Wherein he dyd farre passe the happines
of Sylla, who dyed before he could dedicate that he had built: and
thother deceased before he sawe his worcke overthrowen. For all the
Capitoll was burnt to the ground incontinently after his death. It is
reported the only foundations of the first temple, cost Tarquinius
fortie thousand Pondos of silver. And to gyld only the temple which we
see nowe in our time, they saye all the goodes and substaunce that the
richest cittizen of ROME then had, will come nothing neere unto it:
for it cost above twelve thousand talents. The pillers of this temple
are cut out of a quarrie of marbell, called pentlike marbell, and they
were squared parpine, as thicke as long: these I sawe at ATHENS. But
afterwardes they were cut againe, & polished in ROME, by which doing
they got not so much grace, as they lost proportion: for they were
made to slender, and left naked of their first beawtie. Nowe he that
would wounder at the stately buylding of the Capitoll, if he came
afterwardes unto the palace Domitian, and dyd but see some galerie,
porche, hall, or hotte house, or his concubines chambers: he would
saye (in my opinion) as the poet Epicharmus sayed of a prodigall
man. It is a fault, and folly both in thee to lashe out giftes, and
prodigall rewardes: For fonde delights, without all rule that be,
regarding not what happens afterwardes. So might they justly saye of
Domitian. Thou art not liberall+, not devoute unto the goddes: but it
is a vice thou hast to love to buyld, and desirest (as they saye of
olde Midas) that all about thee were turned to gold, and precious
stones. And thus much for this matter. Tarquine after that great
foughten battell wherein he lost his sonne (that was slaine by Brutus
in fighting together hande to hande) went to the cittie of CLVSIVM,
unto king Claras Porsena: the mightiest prince that raigned at that
time in all ITALIE, and was both noble and a curteous prince. Porsena
promised him ayde: and first of all he sent to ROME to summone the
cittizens to receive their King againe. But the ROMAINES refusing the
summones, he sent forthwith an Heraulde to proclaime open warres
against them, and to tell them where, and when he would meete them:
and then marched thitherwardes immediatly with a great
armie. Publicola nowe being absent, was chosen Consul the second time,
and Titus Lucretius with him. When he was returned home againe to
ROME, bicause he would exceede king Porsena in greatnes of minde, he
beganne to buyld a cittie called SIGLIVRIA, even when the King with
all his armie was not farre from ROME: and having walled it about to
his marvelous charge, he sent thither seven hundred cittizens to dwell
there, to shewe that he made litle accompt of this warre. Howbeit
Porsena at his coming dyd geve suche a lustie assault to the mount
Ianiculum, that they drave out the souldiers which kept the same: who
flying towards ROME, were pursued so harde with the enemies, that with
them they had entered the towne, had not Publicola made a saly out to
resist them. Who beganne a hotte skirmishe harde by the river of
Tyber, and there sought to have stayed the enemies to follow any
further: which being the greater number, dyd overlaye the ROMAINES,
and dyd hurte Publicola very sore in this skirmisher so as he was
caried away into the cittie in his souldiers armes. And even so was
the other Consul Lucretius hurte in like case: which so discoraged and
frayed the ROMAINES, that they all tooke them to their legges and fled
towards the cittie. The enemies pursued them at their heeles as farre
as the wodden bridge: so that the cittie was in marvelous hazarde of
taking upon the sodaine. But Horatius Cocles, and Herminius, and
Lucretius, two other of the chiefest noble young men of the cittie,
stood with them to the defence of the bridge, and made head against
the enemie. This Horatius was surnamed Cocles (as much to saye, as one
eye) bicause he had lost one of them in the warres. Howbeit other
writers saye, it was bicause of his flat nosewhich was so soncke into
his head, that they sawe nothing to parte his eyes, but that the eye
browes dyd meete together: by reason whereof the people thinking to
surname him Cyclops, by corruption of the tongue they called him (as
they saye) Cocles. But howsoever it was, this Horatius Cocles had the
courage to shew his face against the enemie, and to kepe the bridge,
untill such time as they had cut and broken it up behind him. When he
saw they had done that, armed as he was, and hurte in the hippe with a
pike of the THVSCANS, he leaped into the river of Tyber, and saved him
selfe by swimming unto the other side. Publicola woundring at this
manly acte of his, persuaded the ROMAINES straight, every one
according to his abilitie, to give him so much as he spent in a daye:
and afterwards also he caused the common treasury to geve him as much
lande as he could compasse about with his plowe in a daye. Furthermore
he made his image of brasse to be set up in the temple of Vulcane,
comforting by this honour his wounded hippe, whereof he was lame ever
after. Nowe whilest king Porsena was hottely bent, very straightly to
besiege ROME, there beganne a famine among the ROMAINES: and to
encrease the daunger, there came a newe armie out of THVSCANE, which
overranne, burnt, and made waste, all the territorie of
ROME. Whereupon Publicola being chosen Consul, then the third time,
thought he should neede to doe no more to resist Porsena bravely, but
to be quiet only, and to looke well to the safe keeping of the
cittie. Howbeit spying his oportunity, he secretly stole out of ROME
with a power, and did set upon the THVSCANS that destroyed the
countrie about: and overthrew and slue of them, five thousand men. AS
for the historie of Mutius, many doe diversely reporte it: but I will
write it in such sorte, as I thincke shall best agree with the
trothe. This Mutius was a worthie man in all respects, but specially
for the warres. He devising howe he might come to kill king Porsena,
disguised him selfe in THVSCANS apparell, & speaking Thuscan very
perfectly, went into his campe, and came to the Kings chayer, in the
which he gave audience: and not knowing him perfectly, he durst not
aske which was he, least he should be discovered, but drue his sworde
at adventure, and slewe him whom he tooke to be King. Upon that they
layed holde on him, and examined him. And a panne full of fire being
brought for the King that entended to doe sacrifice unto the goddes,
Mutius held out his right hand over the fire, and boldly looking the
King full in his face, whilest the flesh of his hand dyd frye of, he
never chaunged hewe nor contenaunce: the King woundering to see so
straunge a sight, called to them to withdraw the fire, and he him
selfe dyd deliver him his sworde againe. Mutius tooke it of him with
his left hand, whereupon they saye afterwardes, he had geven him the
surname of Scaevola+, as much to saye, as left handed, and told him in
taking of it. Thou couldest not Porsena for feare have overcomed me,
but nowe through curtesy+ thou hast wonne me. Therefore for goodwill I
will reveale that unto thee, which no force, nor extremitie could have
made me utter. There are three hundred ROMAINES dispersed through thy
campe, all which are prepared with like mindes to followe that I have
begonne, only gaping for oportunitie to put it in practise. The lot
fell on me to be the first to breake the Ise of this enterprise: and
yet I am not sorie my hande fayled, to kill so worthie a man, that
deserveth rather to be a friend, then an enemie unto the
ROMAINES. Porsena hearing this, did beleeve it, and ever after he gave
the more willing eare to those that treated with him of peace: not so
much (in my opinion) for that he feared the three hundred lying in
waite to kill him, as for the admiration of the ROMAINES noble minde
and great corage. All other writers call this man, Mutius Scaevola:
howbeit Athenodorus, surnamed Sandon, in a booke he wrote unto
Octavia, Augustus sister, sayeth that he was also called
Opsigonus. But Publicola taking king Porsena not to be so daungerous
an enemie to ROME, as he should be a profitable friend and allie to
the same: let him understand, that he was contented to make him judge
of the controversie betweene them & Tarquine. Whom he dyd many times
provoke to come and have his cause heard before king Porsena, where he
would justifie to his face, that he was the naughtiest and most wicked
man of the world, and that he was justly driven out of his
countrie. Tarquine sharpely aunswered, that he would make no man his
judge, and Porsena least of all other, for that having promised him to
put him againe in his Kingdom, he was nowe gone from his worde, and
had chaunged his minde. Porsena was very angrie with this aunswer,
judging this a manifest token that his cause was ill. Wherefore
Porsena being solicited againe by his owne sonne Aruns, who loved the
ROMAINES, dyd easely graunte them peace upon condition: that they
should redeliver backe againe to him the lands they had gotten before
within the countrie of THVSCAN, with the prisoners also which they had
taken in this warre, and in liew thereof he offered to deliver to them
againe the ROMAINES, that had fled from them unto him. To confirme
this peace, the ROMAINES delivered him ostages, tenne of the noblest
mens sonnes of the cittie, & so many of their daughters: emong which,
was Valeria, Publicolaes owne daughter. Peace being thus concluded,
Porsena brake his armie, and withdrewe his strength, trusting to the
peace concluded. The ROMAINES daughters delivered for ostages, came
downe to the rivers side to washe them, in a quiet place where the
streame ranne but gently, without any force or swiftnes at all. When
they were there, and saw they had no garde about them, nor any came
that waye, nor yet any botes going up nor down the streame: they had a
desire to swime over the river, which ranne with a swift streame, and
was marvelous deepe. Some saye, that one Claelia swamme the river upon
her horse backe, and that she did imbolden and incorage the other to
swimme hard by her horse side: and recovering the other bancke, and
being past all daunger, they went and presented them selves before
Publicola the Consul. Who neither commended them, nor liked the parte
they had played, but was marvelous sorie, fearing least men would
judge him lesse carefull to keepe his faith, then was king Porsena:
and that he might suspect the boldnes of these maidens, was but a
crafty slight devised of the ROMAINES. Therefore he tooke them all
againe, and sent them immediatly unto king Porsena. {courtesy+}
Whereof Tarquine having intelligence, he layed an ambushe for them,
that had the conduction of them. Who so soone as they were paste the
river, did shew them selves, and brake upon the ROMAINES: they being
farre fewer in number than the other, did yet very stowtely defend
them selves. Now whilest they were in earnest fight together, Valeria
Publicolaes daughter, and three of her fathers servants, escaped
through the middest of them, and saved them selves. The residue of the
virgines remained in the middest among their swordes, in great daunger
of their lives. Aruns king Porsenas sonne advertised hereof, ranne
thither incontinently to the rescue: but when he came, the enemies
fled, and the ROMAINES held on their jorney to redeliver their
ostages. Porsena seeing them againe, asked which of them it was that
beganne first to passe the river, and had encouraged the other to
followe her. One pointed him unto her, and told him her name was
Claelia. He looked upon her very earnestly, and with a pleasaunt
countenaunce, and commaunded they should bring him one of his best
horse in the stable, and the richest furniture he had for the same,
and so he gave it unto her. Those which holde opinion that none but
Claelia passed the river a horse backe, doe alledge this to prove
their opinion true. {courtesy+} Other doe denie it, saying that this
THVSCAN king, did onely honour her noble courage. Howsoever it was,
they see her image a horse backe in the holy streete, as they goe to
the palace: and some saye it is the statue of Valeria other of
Claelia. After Porsena had made peace with the ROMAINES, in breaking
up his campe, he shewed his noble minde unto them in many other
things, and specially in that he commaunded his souldiers they should
carie nothing but their armour and weapon only, leaving his campe full
of corne, vittells, and other kynde of goodes. {courtesy+} From whence
this custome came, that at this daye when they make open sale of any
thing belonging to the common weale, the sergeant or common crier
crieth, that they are king Porsenas goodes, and taken of thankefullnes
and perpetuall memorie of his bowntie & liberalitie towards
them. Further, Porsenas image standeth adjoyning to the palace where
the Senate is used to be kept, which is made of great antike
worke. Afterwardes the SABYNES invading the ROMAINES territorie with a
great force, Marcus Valerius Publicolaes brother, was then chosen
Consul, with one Posthumius Tubertus. Howbeit all matters of weight
and importaunce passed by Publicolaes counsell and authoritie, who was
present at any thing that was done: and by whose meanes Marcus his
brother, wanne two great battells, in the last whereof he slewe
thirteene thousand of his enemies, not losing one of his owne men. For
which his victories, besides the hon:ur of triumphe he had, the people
also at their owne charges, built him a house, in the streete of
mounte Palatine, and graunted him moreover that his doore should open
outwards into the streete, where all others mens doores dyd open
inwards into their house: signifying by graunte of this honour and
priviledge, that he should allwayes have benefit by the
commonweale. It is reported that the GRECIANS doores of their houses
in olde time, dyd all open outwards after that facion, and they doe
conjecture it by the comedies that are played. Where those that would
goe out of their houses, dyd first knocke at their doores, and make a
noyse within the house, least in opening their doore upon a sodaine,
they might overthrowe or hurte him that taried at the streete doore,
or passed by the waye: who hearing the noyse had warning straight to
avoyde the daunger. The next yere after that, Publicola was chosen
Consul the fourth time, bicausc they stoode in great doubt that the
SABYNES and LATINES would joyne together to make warres upon them:
besides all this, there was a certaine superstitious feare ranne
through the cittie, of some ill happe toward it, bicause most parte of
the women with childe were delivered of unperfect children, lacking
some one limme or other, and all of them came before their
time. Wherfore Publicola lookng in some of Sybillaes books made
private sacrifice unto Pluto, & did set up againe some feastes and
solemne games that were left of, and had bene commaunded before time
to be kept by the oracle of Apollo. These meanes having a litle
rejoyced the cittie with good hope, bicause they thought that the
anger of the goddes had bene appeased: Publicola then beganne to
provide for the daungers that they were threatned withall by men, for
that newes was brought him that their enemies were up in all places,
and made great preparation to invade them. Nowe there was at that time
amongest the SABYNES, a great riche man called Appius Clausus, very
strong and active of bodie, and otherwise a man of great reputation
and eloquence, above all the rest of his countrie men: but
notwithstanding, he was much envied, and could not avoyde it, being a
thing common to great men. He went about to staye those intended
warres against the ROMAINES. Whereupon, many which before tooke
occasion to murmure against him, dyd nowe much more increase the same:
with saying he sought to mainteine the power of the ROMAINES, that
afterwards by their ayde he might make him selfe tyranne and King of
the countrie. The common people gave easy eare unto such speaches, and
Appius perceyving well enough how the souldiers hated him deadly, he
feared they would complaine, and accuse him. Wherefore being well
backed and stoode to by his kynsemen, friends, and followers, he
practised to make a sturre among the SABYNES, which was the cause of
staying the warres against the ROMAINES. Publicola, also for his parte
was very diligent, not only to understand the originall cause of his
sedition, but to feede on further and increase the same, having gotten
men meete for the purpose, which caried Appius such a message from
him. That Publicola knewe very well he was a just man, and one that
would not be revenged of his cittizens, to the generall hurte of his
countrie, although the injuries he receyved at their hands, delivered
him just occasion to doe it: {Coriolanus+} nevertheles if he had any
desire to provide for his safety and to repaire to ROME, leaving them
which causeles wished him so muche evill, they would both openly and
privately receyve him with that due honour which his vertue deserved
and the worthines of the ROMAINE people required. Clausus having long
and many times considered this matter with him selfe, resolved that it
was the best waye he could take, making vertue of necessitie: and
therefore being determined to doe it, he dyd procure his friends to
doe as he dyd, and they got other also unto them, so that he brought
awaye with him out of the countrie of the SABYNES, five thousand
families with their wives and children (of the quietest and most
peacible people among the SABYNES) to dwel at ROME. Publicola being
advertised thereof before they came, dyd receyve them at their comming
to ROME with great joye, and all manner of good curteous+
enterteinment. For at their first coming, he made them all & their
families free cittizens, & assigned unto every persone of them two
jugera of lande, (which contained one acre, one roode, eleven pole,
and 69. partes of a pole) by the river of Tyber: and unto Appius self
he gave 25. jugera (to wit, 16. acres and a halfe, 4. pole and
76. partes of a pole) and received him into the number of the
Senatours. And thus came he first unto the government of the common
weale in ROME, where he did so wisely behave him self, that in the end
he came to be the chiefest man of dignitie and authoritie in ROME, so
long as he lived. After his death, he left behind him the familie of
the Claudians, descending from him: which for honour, and wordlines,
gave no place to the noblest famine in ROME. But nowe the sedition
amongest the SABYNES being pacified, by the departure of those that
were gone to ROME: the seditious governours would not suffer those
that remained to live in peace, but still cried out, it were to much
shame for them, that Clausus being a fugitive, and become an enemie,
should honour their enemies abroade, that being present durst not
shewe so much at home, and that the ROMAINES should scape unrevenged
who had done them such apparant wronges. So they raised great force
and power, and went and encanped with their armie neere the cittie of
FIDENES, and layed an ambushe harde by ROME, in certen hidden and
hollowe places, where they put a two thousand choyce footemen, very
well armed, and dyd appoint the next morning to send certaine light
horse men to runne and praye to ROME gates: commaunding them, that
when the ROMAINES came out of the cittie to charge them, they should
seeme leysurely to retire, untill they had drawen them within daunger
of their ambush. Publicola receyving full intelligence of all their
intention, by a traytour that fled from them unto him, made due
preparation to encounter with their privie ambushe, and so devided his
armie in two partes: for he gave his sonne in lawe Posthumius Balbus,
three thousand footemen, whom he sent awaye by night, commaunding them
the same night to take the hilles, in the bottome whereof the SABYNES
were layed in ambushes Lucretius, fellowe Consull with Publicola,
having the hghtest and lustiest men of the cittie, was appointed to
make head against the vauntcurriers of the SABYNES, that minded to
approche the gates. And Publicola with the rest of the armie, marched
a great compasse about to inclose his enemies behinde. The next
morning betimes, by chaunce it was a thick miste, and at that present
time Posthumius coming down from the hilles, with great showtes
charged them that laye in ambush. Lucretius on the other side, set
upon the light horsemen of the SABYNES: and Publicola fell upon their
campe. So that of all sides the SABYNES enterprise had very ill
successe, for they had the worst in every place, and the ROMAINES
killed them flying, without any turning againe to make
resistance. Thus the place which gave them hope of best safety, turned
most to their deadly overthrowe. For every one of their companies
supposing the other had bene whole & unbroken, when a charge was geven
upon them, dyd straight breake, and never a company of them turned
head toward their enemie. For they that were in the campe, ranne
toward them which laye in ambushe: & those which were in ambushe on
the contrarie side, ranne towards them that were in campe. So that in
flying, the one met with the other, and founde those, towards whom
they were flying to have bene safe, to stand in as much neede of helpe
as them selves. That which saved some that were not slaine, was the
cittie of FIDENES, which was neere the campe, and specially saved
those which fled thither. But such as came shorte of the cittie, and
could not in time recover it, were all slaine in the fielde, or taken
prisoners. AS for the glorie of this honorable victorie, albeit the
ROMAINES were wonte to ascribe all suche great notable mat- ters to
the speciall providence and grace of the goddes, {HenV+} yet at that
time notwithstanding they dyd judge, that this happy successe fell out
by the wise foresight & valliantnes of the captaine. For every man
that had served in this jorney, had no other talke in his mouth, but
that Publicola had delivered their enemies into their handes, lame,
and blinde, and as a man might saye, bounde hande and feete to kill
them at their pleasure. The people were marvelously enriched by this
victorie aswell for the spoile, as for the ransome of the prisoners
that they had gotten. Nowe Publicola after he had triumphed, and left
the government of the cittie to those, which were chosen Consuls for
the yere following: dyed incontinently, having lived as honorably and
vertuously all the dayes of his life, as any man living might doe. The
people then tooke order for his funeralles, that the charges thereof
should be defrayed by the cittie, as if they had never done him any
honour in his life, and that they had bene still debters unto him for
the noble service he had done unto the state and common weale whilest
he lived. Therefore towardes his funeralle charges, every cittizen
gave a pece of money called a Quatrine. The women also for their
parte, to honour his funeralles, agreed among them selves to mourne a
whole yere in blackes for him, which was a great and honorable
memoriall. He was buried also by expresse order of the people, within
the cittie, in the streate called Velia: and they graunted priviledge
also unto all his posteritie, to be buried in the selfe same
place. Howbeit they doe no more burie any of his there, But when any
dye, they bring the corse unto this place, and one holding a torche
burning in his hande, doth put it under the place, and take it
straight awaye againe, to showe that they have libertie to burie him
there but that they willingly refuse this honour: {courtesy+} and this
done, they carie the corse awaye againe.

THE COMPARISON OF SOLON WITH PUBLICOLA

NOWE presently to compare these two personages together, it seemeth
they both had one vertue in them: which is not founde in any other of
their lives which we have written of before. And the same is, that the
one hath bene a witnes, and the other a follower of him, to whom he
was like. So as the sentence that Solon spake to king Croesus,
touching Tellus felicitie and happiness might have better bene applied
unto Publicola, than to Tellus: whom he judged to be very happy,
bicause he dyed honorably, he had lived vertuously, and had left
behinde him goodly children. And yet Solon speaketh nothing of his
excellencie, or vertue, in any of his poemes: neither dyd he ever
beare any honorable office in all his time, nor yet left any children
that caried any great fame or renowme after his death. Whereas
Publicola so long as he lived, was allwayes the chief man amongest the
ROMAINES, of credit and authoritie: and afterwards since his death,
certaine of the noblest families, and most auncient houses of ROME, in
these our dayes, as the Publicoles, the Messales, and the VALERIANS,
for six hundred yeres continuance, doe referre the glorie of the
nobilitie and auncientie of their house unto him. Furthermore, Tellus
was slaine by his enemies, fighting valiantly like a worthy honest
man. But Publicola died after he had slaine his enemies: which is
farre more great good happe, then to be slaine. {Falstaff+} For after
he as generall had honorably served his country in the warres, and had
left them conquerers, having in his life time receyved all honours &
triumphes due unto his service: he attained to that happy_end+ of
life, which Solon accompted and esteemed, most happy and blessed. Also
in wishing manner, he would his end should be lamented to his prayse,
in a place where he confuteth Mimnermus, about the continuaunce of
mans life, by saying: {posterity+} Let not my death without lamenting
passe, but rather let my friendes bewaile the same: Whose grievous
teares, and cries of out alas, maye ofte resound the Eccho of my
name. If that be good happe, then moste happy maketh he Publicola: for
at his death, not only his friends and kinsefolkes, but the whole
cittie also, and many a thousand persone besides, dyd bitterly bewayle
the losse of him. For all the women of ROME dyd mourne for him in
blacks, & dyd most pittiefully lament his death, as every one of them
had lost either father, brother, or hushand. True it is, that I covet
goodes to have: but yet so got, as maye me not deprave. Solon sayeth
this, bicause vengeance followed ill gotten good. And Publicola tooke
great heede, not only to get his goodes most justly, but had regarde
that those which he had, he spent most honestly in helping the
needie. {generous+} So that if Solon was justly reputed the wisest
man, we must needes confesse also that Publicola was the happiest. For
what the one desired for the greatest and most perfect good, a man can
have in this worlde: the other hath wonne it, kept it, and used it all
his life time, untill the hower of his death. And thus hath Solon
honoured Publicola, and Publicola hath done like unto Solon, shewing
him self a perfect example and looking glasse, where men maye see howe
to governe a popular state: when he made his Consulshippe voyde of all
pride and stately shewe, and became him self affable+, curteous, and
beloved of everie bodie. So tooke he profit by many of his lawes. AS
when he ordeined, that the people only should have authoritie to
choose and create, all common officers and magistrates, and that they
might appeale from any judge to the people: as Solon when he suffered
them to appeale unto the judges of the people. In deede Publicola dyd
not create any newe Senate, as Solon dyd: but he dyd augment the first
number, with as many persones almost as there were before. He dyd also
first erect the office of Quaestores, for keeping of all fines, taxes,
and other collections of money. Bicause the chiefest magistrate, if he
were an honest man, should not for so light an occasion be taken, from
the care of better and more weightie affayers: and if he were wickedly
geven and ill disposed, that he should have no such meane or occasion
to worke his wicked will, by having the treasure of the cittie in his
handes, and to commaund what he lyst. Moreover in hating the
tyrannes+, Publicola therein was farre more sharpe & terrible. For
Solon in his lawes punished him that went about to make him selfe
tyranne, yet after he was convicted thereof by lawe: but Publicola
ordeined that they should kill him, before the lawe dyd passe on him,
that sought to be king. And where Solon justly, and truely vaunteth
him self, that being offered to be King & Lord of ATHENS, and that
with the whole consent of the cittizens: yet he dyd notwithstanding
refuse it. This vaunte and glorie is as due unto Publicola: who
finding the dignitie of a Consul tyrannicall, he brought it to be more
lowly and favorable for the people, not taking upon him all the
authoritie he might lawfully have done. And it seemeth that Solon
knewe before him, what was the true and direct waye to governe a
common weale uprightly. For he sayeth in one place: Both great and
small of power, the better will obaye: if we to litle or to much, upon
them doe not laye. The discharging of dettes was proper to Solon,
which was a full confirmation of libertie. For litle prevayleth lawe
to make equalitie among cittizens, when dettes do hinder the poore
people to enjoye the benefit thereof. And where it seemeth that they
have most libertie, as in that they maye be chosen judges and officers
to speake their opinion in the counsell, and geve their voyces also:
there in deede are they most bounde and subject, bicause they doe but
obaye the rich, in all they doe commaund. But yet in this acte there
is a thinge more wonderful, and worthie to be noted. That commonly
discharging of dettes, was wont to breede great tumultes, and
seditions in common weales. And Solon having used it in a very good
time (as the phisitian ventring a daungerous medecine) dyd appease the
sedition already begonne, and did utterly quenche through his glorie,
and the common opinion they had of his wisdome and vertue, all the
infamie and accusation that might have growen of that acte. AS for
their first entrie into the government, Solons beginning was farre
more noble. For he went before, and followed not another: and him
selfe alone without any others helpe, dyd put in execution the best, &
more parte of all his notable and goodly lawes. Yet was Publicolaes
ende and death+ much more glorious and happie. For Solon before he
dyed, sawe all his comon wealthe overthrowen: but Publicolaes common
weale continued whole as he left it, untill the broyle of civill
warres beganne againe among them. Solon, after he had made his lawes,
and written them in wodden tables, leaving them without defence of any
man, went his waye immediatly out of the cittie of ATHENS. Publicola
abiding continually in ROME governing the state, dyd throughly
stablishe and confirme the lawes he made. Furthermore Solon having
wisely forseene Pisisitratus practises, aspiring to make him selfe
King: he could never let him for all that, but was him selfe overcome
and oppressed with the tyrannie he sawe stablished in his owne sight,
and in dispight of him.  Where Publicola overthrewe and dyd put downe
a mightie Kingdome, that had continued of long time, and was throughly
stablished: his vertue and desire being equall with Solons, and having
had besides fortune favorable, and sufficient power to execute, his
vertuous and well disposed minde. But as for warres and marshall
deedes, there is no comparison to be made betweene them. For Daimachus
Plataeian, doth not attribute the warres of the MEGARIANS unto Solon,
as we have written it: where Publicola being gencrall of an armie, and
fighting him selfe in persone, hath wonne many great battells. And as
for matters of peace and civill government, Solon never durst present
him self openly to persuade the enterprise of SALAMINA, but under a
counterfeat madnes, and as a foole to make sporte. Where Publicola
taking his adventure from the beginning, shewed him selfe without
dissimulation, an open enemie to Tarquine, and afterwardes he revealed
the whole conspiracie. And when he had bene the only cause and autor
of punishing the traitours, he dyd not only drive out of ROME the
tyrannes selves in persone, but tooke from them also all hope of
returne againe. Who having allwayes thus nobly and valliantly behaved
him self, without shrinking backe, or flying from ought that required
force, a manly corage, or open resistaunce: dyd yet shewe him selfe
discreete+, where wisedome was requisite, or reason and persuasion
needefull. AS when he conningly wanne king Porsena, who was a dredfull
enemie unto him, and invincible by force: whom he handled in such good
sorte, that he made him his friend. Peradventure some might stand in
this and saye: that Solon recovered the Ile of SALAMINA unto the
ATHENIANS, which they would have lost. Publicola to the contrarie,
restored the lands unto Porsena againe, which the ROMAINES had
conquered before, within the countrie of THVSCAN. But the times in
which these things were done, are allwayes to be considered of. For a
wise governour of a Realme, and politicke man, doth governe diversely
according to the occasions offred, taking every thing in his time
wherein he will deale. {expediency+} And many times, in letting goe
one thing, he saveth the whole, and in losing a litle he gayneth
much. AS Publicola dyd: who losing a litle piece of another mans
countrie which they had usurped, saved by that meanes all that was
assuredly his owne. And whereas the ROMAINES thought he should doe
very much for them, to save their cittie only: he got them moreover,
all the goodes that were in their enemies campe, which dyd besiege
them. And in making his enemie judge of his quarrell, he wanne the
victorie: winning that moreover, which he would gladly have geven to
have overcome, and have sentence passe of his side. For the King their
enemie dyd not only make peace with, them, but dyd also leave them all
his furniture, provision, and munition for the warres: even for the
vertue, manhood, and justice, which the great wisedome of this Consul
persuaded Porsena to beleeve to be, in all the other ROMAINES. The
ende of Publicolaes life.

The Life of Themistocles+

parentage dyd litle advaunce his glorie: for his father Neocles was of
small reputation in ATHENS, being of the hundred of Phrear, and tribe
of Leontis: of his mother an allien or straunger: as these verses doe
witnesse: Abrotonon I am, yborne in Thracia, and yet this highe good
happe l have, that into Grecia I have brought forth a sonne,
Themistocles by name, the glorie of the Greekishe bloods, & man of
greatest fame. Howbeit Phanias writeth, that his mother was not a
THRACIAN, but borne in the countrie of CARIA: and they doe not call
her Abrotonon, but Euterpe. And Neanthes sayeth furthermore, that she
was of HALICARNAS- SUS, the chiefest cittie of all the Realme of
CARIA. For which cause when the straungers dyd assemble at Cynosargos
(a place of exercise without the gate dedicated to Hercules, which was
not a right god, but noted an alien, in that his mother was a mortall
woman:) Themislocles persuaded divers youthes of the most honourable
houses, to goe down with him, and to annointe them selves at
Cynosargos, conningly thereby taking away the difference betwene the
right and alien sorte. But setting a parte all these circumstaunces,
he was no doubt allied unto the house of the Lycomedians: for
Themistocles caused the chappell of this familie, which is in the
village of PHLYES, being once burnt by the barbarous people, to be
buylt up againe at his owne charges: and as Simonides sayeth, he dyd
set it forth and enriche it with pictures. Moreover every man doth
confesse it, that even from his childhood they dyd perceyve he was
geven to be very whotte headed, sturring, wise, and of good spirite,
and enterprising of him selfe to doe great things, and borne to rule
weighty causes. For at such dayes and howers as he was taken from his
booke, and had leave to playe, he never played, not would never be
idle, as other children were: but they allwayes founde him conning
some oration without booke, or making it alone by him selfe, and the
ground of his matter was ever comonly, either to defend, or accuse
some of his companions. Whereupon his schoolemaster observing him,
ofte sayed unto him: suer some great matter hangeth over thy head my
boye, for it cannot be chosen but that one daye thou shalt doe some
notable good thing, or some extreme mischief. Therefore when they went
about to teache him any thing, only to checke his nature, or to facion
him with good manner and civilitie, or to studie any matter for
pleasure or honest pastime: he would slowly and carelesly learne of
them. But if they delivered him any matter of wit, and things of
weight concerning state: they sawe he would THEMISTOCLES beate at it
marvelously, & would understande more then any could of his age and
cariage, trusting altogether to his naturall mother wit. This was the
cause, that being mocked afterwardes by some that had studied
humanitie, and other liberall sciences, he was driven for revenge and
his owne defence, to aunswer with great and stowte wordes, saying,
that in deede he could no skill to tune a harpe, nor a violl, nor to
playe of a psalterion: but if they dyd put a cittie into his handes
that was of small name, weake, and litle, he knewe wayes enough how to
make it noble, stronge, and great. Nevertheles, Stesimbrotus writeth,
how he went to Anaxagoras schoole, and that under Melissus he studied
naturall philosophie. But herein he was greatly deceaved, for that he
tooke no great hede unto the time. For Melissus was captaine of the
SAMIANS against Pericles, at what time he dyd laye seige unto the
cittie of SAMOS. Now this is true, Pericles was much younger then
Themistocles, and Anaxagoras dwelt with Pericles in his owne
house. Therefore we have better reason and occasion to beleeve those
that write, Themistocles dyd determine to followe Mnesiphilus
Phrearian. For he was no professed Orator, nor naturall philosopher,
as they termed it in that time: but made profession of that which then
they called wisedome. Which was no other thing, but a certen knowledge
to handle great causes, and an indevour to have a good wit and
judgment in matters of state & government: which profession beginning
in Solon, dyd continue, and was taken up from man to man, as a secte
of philosophie. But those that came sithence, have mingled it with
arte of speache, & by litle and litle have translated the exercise of
deedes+, unto bare and curious wordes: {PlainDealer+} whereupon they
were called Sophisters, as who would saye, counterfeate wise
men. Notwithstanding, when Themistocles beganne to medle with the
government of the common weale, he followed much Mnesiphilus. In the
first parte of his youth, his be- haviour and doings were very light
and unconstant, as one caried awaye with a rashe head, and without any
order or discretion: by reason whereof his manners and conditions
seemed marvelously to chaunge, and oftimes fell into very ill favored
events, as him self dyd after'wards confesse by saying: that a ragged
colte oftimes proves a good horse, specially if he be well ridden, and
broken as he should be. Other tales which some will seeme to adde to
this, are in my opinion but fables. AS that his father dyd disinherite
him, and that his mother for very care and sorowe she tooke to see the
lewde life of her sonne, dyd kill her self. For there are that write
to the contrary, that his father being desirous to take him from
dealing in government, dyd goe and shewe him all alongest the sea
shore, the shippewracks and ribbes of olde gallyes cast here and
there, whereof no reckoning was made, and sayed to him: thus the
people use their governours, when they can serve no lenger. Howsoever
it was, it is most true that Themistocies earnestly gave him self to
state, and was sodainely taken with desire of glorie. For even at his
first entrie, bicause he would set foote before the prowdest, he
stoode at pyke against the greatest and mightiest persones, that bare
the swaye and government, & specially against Aristides, Lysimachus
sonne, who ever encountered him, and was still his adversarie
opposite. Yet it seemeth the evil will he conceived toward him, came
of a very light cause. For they both loved Stesilaus, that was borne
in the cittie of TEOS, as Ariston the philosopher writeth. And after
this jealousie was kindled betweene them, they allwayes tooke contrary
parte one against another, not only in their private likings, but also
in the government of the common weale. Yet I am persuaded, that the
difference of their manners and conditions, did much encrease the
grudge and discorde betwext them. For Aristides being by nature a very
good man, a just dealer, and honest of life, and one THEMISTOCLES that
in all his doings would never flatter the people, nor serve his owne
glorie, but rather to the contrary would doe, would saye, and
counsaill allwayes for the most benefit and commoditie of the common
weale: was oftetimes enforced to resist Themistocles, and disapoint
his ambition, being ever busilie moving the people, to take some new
matter in hande. For they reporte of him, that he was so inflamed with
desire of glorie, and to enterprise great matters, that being but a
very yoong man at the battell of Marathon, where there was no talke
but of the worthines of captaine Miltiades that had wonne the battell:
he was found many times solitarilie there alone devising with him
self: besides, they saye he could then take no rest in the night,
neither would goe to playes in the daye time, nor would keepe companie
with those whom he was accustomed to be familiar withall
before. Furthermore, he would tell them that woundred to see him so in
his muses, and chaunged, and asked him what he ayled: that Miltiades
victorie would not let him sleepe, bicause other thought this
overthrow at MARATHON, would have made an end of all warres. Howbeit
Themistocles was of a contrary opinion, and that it was but a
beginning of greater troubles. Therefore he daylie studied howe to
prevent them, and how to see to the safetie of GREECE and before
occasion offered, he did exercise his cittie in feats of warre,
foreseeing what should followe after. Wherefore, where the cittizens
of ATHENS before dyd use to devide among them selves the revenue of
their mines of silver, which were in a parte of ATTICA called LAVRION:
he alone was the first that durst speake to the people, and persuade
them, that from thenceforth they should cease that distribution among
them selves, and employe the money of the same in making of gallyes,
to make warres against the AEGINETES. For their warres of all GREECE
were most cruell, bicause they were lords of the sea, and had so great
a number of shippes. This persuasion drue the cittizens more easely to
Themistocles side, than the threatning them with king Darius, or the
Persians would have done: who were farre from them, and not feared
that they would come neere unto them. So this oportunitie taken of the
hatred and jealousie betwene the ATHENIANS and the AEGINETES, made the
people to agree, of the said money to make an hundred gallyes, with
which they fought against king Xerxes, and did overcome him by
sea. Now after this good beginning and successes he wanne the
cittizens by degrees to bende their force to sea, declaring unto them,
howe by lande they were scant able to make heade against their
equalles, whereas by their power at sea, they should not only defende
them selves from the barbarous people, but moreover be able to
commaund all GRECE. Hereupon he made them good mariners, and passing
sea men, as Plato sayeth, where before they were stowte and valliant
souldiers by lande. This gave his enemies occasion to cast it in his
teethe afterwards, that he had taken away from the ATHENIANS the pike
and the target, and had brought them to the banke and the ower: and so
he got the upper hand of Miltiades. Who inveyed against hin in that,
as Stesimbrotus writeth. Now after he had thus his will, by bringing
this sea service to passe, whether thereby he dyd overthrow the
justice of the comon weale or not, I leave that to the philosophers to
dispute. But that the preservation of all GRECE stoode at that time
upon the sea, and that the gallyes only were the cause of setting up
ATHENS againe: Xerxes him self is a sufficient witnes, besides other
proofes that might be brought thereof. For his armie by lande being
yet whole, and unset on, when he saw his armie by sea broken,
dispersed, and souncke, he fled straight upon it, confessing as it
were that he was nowe to weake to deale any more with THEMISTOCLES the
GREECIANS, & left Mardonius his lieutenant in GREECE, of purpose in my
opinion, rather to let that the GREECIANS should not followe him, then
for any hope he had to overcome them. Some write of Themistocles, that
he was a very good husband for his own profit, and carefull to looke
to his things: for he dyd spende liberally+, and loved ofte to make
sacrifices, and honorably to receyve & entertaine straungers:
wherefore he had good reason to be carefull to get, to defraye his
charges. Other to the contrary, blame him much, that he was to nere,
and miserable: for some saye, he would sell presents of meate that
were geven him. He dyd aske one Philides on a time, which had a brede
of mares, a colte of gifte: who denying him flatly, he was so angrie,
that he threatned him ere it were long he would make his house the
horse of wodde, with the which TROIA was taken. Meaning covertly to
let him understande, that he would shortly set strife and quarrel
betwext him, and his nearest kinsemen and familiar friends. It is true
that he was the most ambitious man of the world. For when he was but a
young man, and scantly knowen, he earnestly entreated one Epicles,
borne at HERMIONNA, an excellent player of the citherne, and counted
at that time the conningest man in all ATHENS at that instrument, that
he would come & teache his arte at his house: and all was no more, but
that many people being desirous to heare him playe, should aske for
his house, and come thither to him. And one yere when he went unto the
feast and assembly of the playes Olympicall, he would nedes keepe open
house for all commers, have his tents richely furnished, and a great
traine of servants and all other furniture, only to contende with
Cimon. This marvelously spighted the GREECIANS, who thought
Themistocles expences fit for Cimons countenance, and abilitie,
bicause he was a young gentleman, and of a noble house: but for him
that was but a new come man, and would beare a greater porte, then
either became his calling or abilitie, they thought it not only
unallowable in him, but meere presumption and vaine glorie. Another
time he defrayed the whole charges of a tragedie which was played
openly: and being set out therein to have wonne the prise, and the
ATHENIANS being marvelous desirous of the honour in such playes, he
caused this victorie of his to be painted in a table, which he did
dedicate and set up in a temple, with this inscription: 'Themistocles
Phrearian defrayed The charges: Phrynicus made it: Adimantus was chief
ruler.' Yet notwithstanding he was well taken of the common people,
partly bicause he would speake to every cittizen by his name, no man
telling him their names: and partly also bicause he shewed him self an
upright judge in private mens causes. AS one daye he aunswered the
poet Simonides, borne in Chio, who dyd request an unreasonable matter
at his hands, at that time when he was governour of the cittie. Thou
couldest be no good poet, Simonides, if thou diddest singe against the
rules of musike: neither my self a good governour of a citie, if I
should doe any thing against the lawe. And mocking the same Simonides
another time, he told him he was but a foole to speake ill of the
CORINTHIANS, considering they were lords of so great and strong a
cittie. Likewise he was not wise to make him self to be drawen, being
so deformed and ill favored. But being growne in credit, and having
wonne the favour of the people, he was such an enemy to Aristides,
that in the end he made him to be expulsed and banished ATHENS, for
5. yeres. When newes were brought that the king of PERSIA was onwardes
on his jorney and coming downe to make warres upon the GREECIANS: the
ATHENIANS consulted whom they should make their generall. And it is
reported, that all their common counsellers which were wont to speake
in matters, fearing the THEMISTOCLES daunger, dyd drawe backe, save an
orator called Epicydes, Euphemides sonne, very eloquent in speache,
but somwhat womanishe, fainte harted, and gredie of money, offred him
self to sue for this charge, and had some hope to obteine
it. Wherefore Themistocles fearing all would not be well, if it fell
to this man to be generall of the armie, he bought out Epicydes
ambition with ready money, and so made him let fall his sute. It fell
out Themistocles was greatly comended, about that was done to the
interpreter, that came with the king of PERSIAES ambassadours, and
demaunded the empire of the GPEECIANS both by sea and lande, that they
should acknowledge obedience to the King. For he caused him to be
taken, and put to death by a comon consent, for using the Greeke
tongue in the service and commaundement of the barbarous people. It
was a notable thing also, that at his motion, Arthmius born at ZELEA,
was noted of infamie, both he, his children, and all his posteritie
after him, bicause he brought gold from the king of PERSIA, to corrupt
and winne the GREECIANS. But the greatest and worthiest acte he did in
those parts, was this: that he pacified all civill warres among the
GREECIANS, persuading the citties to leave of their quarrels untill
the warres were done, in the which they saye Chileus Arcathan did
helpe him more then any other man. He being now chosen general] of the
ATHENIANS, went about presently to imbarke his cittizens into gallyes,
declaring to them they should leave their cittie, and goe mete with
the barbarous King by sea, so farre from the coast of GREECE as they
could: but the people did not thincke that good. Wherefore he led
great numbers of souldiers by lande, into the countrie of TEMPES with
the LACEDAEMONIANS, to keepe the passage & entrie into THESSALIE,
against the barbarous people, which countrie stoode yet sownde to
GREECE, and not revolted to the MEDES. Afterwards the GRECIANS coming
from thence without any acte done, and the THESSALIANS also being
wonne somewhat on the Kings side, for that all the whole country unto
BOEOTIA was at the devotion and goodwill of the barbarous people: then
the ATHENIANS beganne to finde, howe Themistocles opinion to fight by
sea was very good. Whereupon they sent him with their navie to the
cittie of ARTEMISIVM, to kepe the straight. There the other GRECIANS
would have had the LACEDAEMONIANS and their admirall Eurybiades to
have had the authoritie and commaundement of the rest. But the
ATHENIANS would not set sayle under any other admirall then their own,
bicause theirs were the greatest number of shippes in the armie, and
above all the other GRECIANS. Themistocles foreseing the daunger that
was likely to fall out amongest them selves, dyd willingly yelde the
whole authoritie unto Eurybiades, and got the ATHENIANS to agree unto
it: assuring them, that if they behaved them selves valliantly in
these warres, the other GREECIANS of their own accorde would
afterwards subject them selves unto their obedience. Hereby it
appeareth, that he only of all other was at that time, the originall
cause of the saving of GREECE, and dyd most advaunce the honour and
glorie of the ATHENIANS, by making them to overcome their enemies by
force, and their friends and allies with liberalitie+. In the meane
time, Eurybiades seing the barbarous flete riding at anker, all
alongest the Ile of APHETES, with such a great number of shippes in
the vaward, he beganne to be affrayed. And understanding moreover,
there were other 200. sayle that went to cast about the Ile of
SCIATHE, and so to come in: he presently would have retired further
into GRFECE, and would have drawen neerer unto PELOPONNESVS, to the
end their army by sea might be neare their army by lande, as thinking
it unpossible to fight with king Xer- THEMISTOCLES xes power by
sea. Whereupon the inhabitants of the Ile of EVBOEA, fearing least the
GRECIANS would [leave them] to the spoyle of the enemy, they caused
Themistocles secretly to be spoken with all, & sent him a good somme
of money by one called Pelagon. Themistocles tooke the money, as
Herodotus writeth, and gave it to Eurybiades. But there was one
Architeles amongest the ATHENIANS, captaine of the galley called the
holy galley, that was much against Themistocles intended purpose: who
having no money to paye his mariners, dyd what he could that they
might departe with speede from thence. Themistocles sturred up then
his souldiers more against him then before, insomuch as they went
abord@s galley, and tooke his supper from him. Architeles being
marvelous angrie and offended withall, Themistocles sent him both
bread & meat in a pannier, and in the bottome thereof he had put a
talent of silver, bidding him for that night to suppe with that, and
the next morning he should provide for his mariners, or els he would
complaine, and accuse him to the cittizens that he had taken money of
the enemies. Thus it is written by Phanias Lesbian. Moreover these
first fights in the straite of EVBOEA, betweene the GPEECIANS, and the
barbarous people, were nothing to purpose to end the warres betwene
them. For it was but a taste geven unto them, which served the
GREECIANS turne very much, by making them to see by experience, and
the manner of the fight, that it was not the great multitude of
shippes, nor the pompe and sumptuous setting out of the same, nor the
prowde barbarous showts and songes of victorie that could stande them
to purpose, against noble harts and valliant minded souldiers, that
durst grapple with them, & come to hands strokes with their enemies:
and that they should make no reckoning of all that bravery and
bragges, but should sticke to it like men, and laye it on the jacks of
them. The which (as it seemeth) the poet Pindarus understoode very
well, when he sayed touching the battell of ARTEMISIVM. The stowte
Athenians, have nowe foundation layed, unto the libertie of Greece, by
these assaults assayed. For out of doubt the beginning of victorie, is
to be hardie. This place ARTEMISIVM is a parte of the Ile of EVBOEA,
looking towards the north, above the cittie of ESTIAEA, lying directly
over against the country which somtimes was under the obedience of the
PHILOCTETES, and specially of the Cittie of OLIZON. There is a litle
temple of Diana, surnamed Orientall, round about the which there are
trees, and a compasse of pillers of white stone, which when a man
rubbes with his hande, they shewe of the culler and savour of
safferne. And in one of those pillers there is an inscription of
lamentable verses to this effect. When boldest bloods of Athens by
their might had overcome, the numbers infinite of Asia: they then in
memorie, of all their dedes, and valliant victorie beganne to builde,
this noble monument: and to Diane the same they dyd present for that
they had the Medes likewise subdued, and with their blood, their hardy
hands embrued. There is a place seene also upon that coast at this
daye, a good waye into the lande, in the middest whereof are great
sands full of blacke dust as ashes: and they thincke that they burnt
in that place all dead bodies and olde shippwracks. Newes being
brought what had bene done in the countrie of THERMOPYLES, how that
king Leonidas was dead, and how that Xerxes had won that entry into
GREECE by lande: the GREECIANS then brought their whole army by sea
more into GREECE, the ATHE- THEMISTOCLES NIANS being in the rereward
in this retire, as men whose hartes were lifte up with the glorie of
their former valliant dedes. Nowe Themistocles passing by those places
where he knewe the enemies must of necessitie fall upon the lee shore
for harborow: he dyd ingrave certen wordes spoken unto the IONIANS in
great letters in stone, which he founde there by chaunce, or purposely
brought thither for that purpose, where there was very good harber for
shippes, and fit places also to lye in. These were the wordes, that
the IONIANS should take the GREECIANS partes being their founders and
auncesters, & such as fought for their libertie: or at the least they
should trouble the armie of the barbarous people, and doe them all the
mischief they could, when the GREECIANS should come to fight with
them. By these words he hoped either to bring the IONIANS to take
their parte, or at the least he should make the barbarous people
jealous and mistrustfull of them. Xerxes being already entred in the
uppermost parte of the province of DORICA, into the countrie of
PHOCIDA, burning and destroying the townes & citties of the PHOCIANS:
the other GREECIANS laye still and suffered the invasion,
notwithstanding the ATHENIANS did request them to mete with the
barbarous armie in BOEOTIA, to save the countrie of ATTICA, as before
they had done, when they went by sea to ARTEMISIVM. But they would not
hearken to it in no wise, and all was bicause they were desirous they
should drawe to the straite of PELOPONNESVS, and there they should
assemble the whole strength and power of GREECE within the barre of
the same, and make a strong substantiall walle from the one sea to the
other. The ATHENIANS were very angrie at this devise, and were half
discoraged and out of harte, to see them selves thus forsaken and cast
of, by the rest of the GREECIANS. For it was out of all speache that
they alone should fight against so many thousands of enemies: and
therefore their only remedy was, to leave their cittie: and to get
them to the sea. The people were very unwilling to listen hereunto,
making their reckoning it was nedeles to be carefull to overcome, or
to save them selves, having once forsaken the temples of their godds,
and the graves of their parents. Wherfore Themislocles seeing that
neither reason, nor mans persuasion could bring the people to like his
opinion: he beganne to frame a devise (as men doe use somtimes in
tragedies) and to threaten the ATHENIANS with signes from heaven, with
oracles and aunswers from the goddes. And the occasion of Minervaes
draggon served his turne for a celestiall signe and token, which by
good fortune dyd not appeare in those dayes in the temple as it was
wont to doe: and the priests found the sacrifices which were daylie
offered to him, whole and untouched by any. Wherefore being enformed
by Themistocles what they should doe, they spred a brute abroade
amongest the people, that the goddesse Minerva, the protectour and
defendour of the cittie, had forsaken it, pointing them the waye unto
the sea. And againe he wanne them by a prophecie, which commaunded
them to save them selves in walles of wodd: saying, that the walles of
wodd dyd signifie nothing els but shippes. And for this cause he
saied, Apollo in his oracle called SALAMINA divine, not miserable nor
unfortunate, bicause it should geve the name of a most happy victorie
which the GREECIANS should get there. And so at the last they
following his counsell, he made this decree, that they should leave
the cittie of ATHENS to the custodie of the goddesse Pallas, that was
lady and governour of the country, and that all those which were of
age to carie any weapon should get them to the gallyes: and for the
rest, that every man should see his wife, children, and bondmen placed
in some suer place as well as he could. After this decree was
THEMISTOCLES past and authorised by the people, the most parte of them
did convey their aged fathers and mothers, their wives and litle
children, into the cittie of TROEZEN, where the TROEZENIANS receyved
them very lovingly and gently. For they gave order that they should be
entertained of the common charge, allowing them a pece, two obulos of
their money a daye, and suffered the young children to gather fruite
wheresoever they founde it: and furthermore dyd hier schoolemasters at
the charge of the common wealth, to bring them up at schoole. He that
was the penner of this decree, was one called Nicagoras. The ATHENIANS
at that time, had no common money, but the Senate of the Areopagites
(as Aristotle sayeth) furnished every souldier with eight drachmas,
which was the only meane that the gallyes were armed. Yet Clidemus
writeth, that this was a crafte devised of Themistocles. The ATHENIANS
being come downe unto the haven of PIRAEA, he made as though Pallas
tergat (on the which Medusaes heade was graven) had bene lost, and was
not found with the image of the goddesse: and faining to seeke for it,
he ransacked every corner of the gallyes, and founde a great deale of
silver which private persones had hidden amongest their fardells. This
money was brought out unto the people, and by this meanes the
souldiers that were shipped had wherewithal, to provide them of
necessary things. When time came that they were to departe the haven,
and that all the cittie of ATHENS had taken sea: one waye it was a
pittie to beholde them. Another waye it made all sortes to wounder,
that considered the boldnes and corage of those men, which before sent
awaye their fathers, and mothers from them, and were nothing moved at
the teares, cries, sherikes, and imbrasings of their wives, their
children, and departures, but stowtly and resolutely helde on their
course to SALAMINA. Notwithstanding, there were many olde cit- tizens
lest still of necessitie in ATHENS, bicause they could not be removed
for very extreme age, which sturred many with compassion toward
them. There was besides, a certen pittie that made mens harts to
yerne, when they saw the poore doggs, beasts, and cattell ronne up and
downe bleating, mowing, and howling out alowde after their masters, in
token of sorowe, when they dyd imbarke. Amongest these, there goeth a
straunge tale of Xanthippus dogge, who was Pericles father: which for
sorowe his master had left him behinde him, dyd cast him self after
into the sea, and swimming still by the galleys side wherein his
master was, he helde on to the Ile of SALAMINA, where so sone as the
poore curre landed, his breath fayled him, and dyed presently. They
saye, at this daye the place called the doggs grave, is the very place
where he was buried. These were straunge acts of Themistocles, that
beholding the ATHENIANS sory for the absence of Aristides, and fearing
least of spyte he taking parte with the barbarous nation, might have
bene the ruine and distruction of the state of GREECE, being banished
five yeres also before the warres, by Themistocles procurement: that
he dyd set forth a decree, that all those which had bene banished for
a time, might returne home againe, to doe, to saye, and to geve
counsell to the cittizens in those things, which they thought best for
the' preservation of GREECE. And also where Eurybiades, being generall
of the GREECIANS whole army by sea, for the worthines of the cittie of
SPARTA, but otherwise a rancke coward at time of need, would in any
case departe from thence, and retire into the goulfe of PELOPONNESVS,
where all the army of the PELOPONNESIANS was by lande assembled: that
Themistocles withstood him, and did hinder it all he could. At that
time also it was, that Themistocles made so notable aunswers, which
specially are noted, and gathered together. For when Eurybi-
THEMISTOCLES ades sayed one daye unto him. Themistoles, those that at
playes and games doe rise before the company, are whistled at. It is
true, said Themistocles: but those that tarie last so, doe never winne
any game. Another time Eurybiades having a staffe in his hande lift it
up, as though he would have striken him. Strike and thou wilt, said
he, so thou wilt heare me. Euryhiades woundring to see him so pacient,
suffered him then to saye what he would. Then Themistocles beganne to
bring him to reason: but one that stoode by sayed unto
him. Themistocles, for a man that hath neither cittie nor house, it is
an ill parte to will others that have, to forsake all. Themistocles
turning to him, replied. We have willingly forsaken our houses and
walles, sayed he, cowardly beaste that thou arte, bicause we would not
become slaves for feare to lose things, that have neither soule nor
life. And yet our cittie I tell thee is the greatest of all GREECE:
for it is a fleete of two hundred galleys ready to fight, which are
come hither to save you if you list. But if you will needes goe your
wayes, and forsake us the seconde time: you shall heare tell ere it be
long, that the ATHENIANS have another free cittie, and have possessed
againe as much good land, as that they have already lost. These wordes
made Eurybiades presently thincke, and feare, that the ATHENIANS would
not goe, and that they would forsake them. And as another Eretrian was
about to utter his reason against Themistocles opinion: he could not
but aunswer him. Alas, and must you my masters talke of warres to,
that are like to a Sleue? In deede you have a sworde, but you lacke a
harte. Some write, that whilest Themistoles was talking thus from his
galley, they spyed an owle flying on the right hande of the shippes,
which came to light on one of the mastes of the galleys: and that
hereupon all the other GREECIANs dyd agree to his opinion, and pre-
pared to fight by sea. But when the flete of their enemies shippes
shewed on the coastes of ATTICA, harde by the haven Phalericus, and
covered all the rivers thereabouts, as farre as any bodie could see,
and that king Xerxes him selfe was come in persone with all his army
by lande, to campe by the sea side: so that his whole power both by
lande and sea might be seene in sight: then the GREECIANS had
forgotten all Themistocles goodly persuasions, and beganne to incline
againe to the PELOPONNESIANS, considering how they might recover the
goulfe of PELOPONNESVS, and they dyd growe very angry, when any man
went about to talke of any other matter. To be shorte, it was
concluded that they should sayle awaye the next night following, and
the masters of the shippes had order geven them to make all things
readie for them to departe. Themistocles perceyving their
determination, he was marvelous angry in his minde, that the GREECIANS
would thus disperse them selves a sonder, repairing every man to his
owne cittie, and leaving the advantage which the nature of the place,
and the straight of the arme of the sea, where they laye in harber
together, did offer them: and so he bethought him selfe howe this was
to be holpen. Sodainely the practise of one Sicinus came into his
minde, who being a PERSIAN borne, and taken prisoner before in the
warres, loved Themistocles very well, and was schoolemaster to his
children. This Sicinus he secretly. sent unto the king of PERSIA, to
advertise him that Themistocles (generall of the ATHENIANS) was very
desirous to become his majesties servaunte, & that he dyd let him
understand betimes, that the GREECIANS were determined to flye: and
therefore that he wished him not to let them scape, but to set upon
them, whilest they were troubled and affrayed, and farre from their
army by lande, to the ende that upon a sodaine he might THEMISTOCLES
overthrowe their whole power by sea. Xerxes supposing this
intelligence came from a man that wished him well, receyved the
messenger with great joye, and thereupon gave present order to his
captaines by sea, that they should imbarke their men into the other
shippes at better leysure, and that presently they should put out with
all possible speede, two hundred sayle to followe the GREECIANS in the
taile, to shut up the foreland of the straite, and to compasse the
Iles all about, that not one of his enemies shippes should scape: and
so it fell out. The n Aristides (Lysimachus sonne) being the first
that perceyved it, went to Themistocles tente, though he was his
enemie, & through his only meanes had bene banished before, as ye have
heard: and calling him out, told him how they were
environned. Themistocles, who knewe well enough the goodnes of this
man, being very glad he came at that time to seeke him out, declared
unto him the pollicie he had used by the message of Sicinus, praying
him to put to his helpe to staye the GREECIANS, and to procure with
him, considering his worde had more authoritie among them, that they
would fight within the straight of SALAMINA. Aristides commending his
great wisdome, went to deale with the captaines of the other gallyes,
and to procure them to fight. For all this, they would not credit that
he sayed, untill such time as there arrived a galley of TENEDIENA,
whereof one Panetius was captaine, who being stolen out of the hoste
of the barbarous army, brought certen newes, that the straight out of
doubt was shut up. So that besides the necessitie which dyd urge them,
the spight which the GREECIANS conceyved thereof, dyd provoke them to
hazard the battell. The next morning by breake of daye, king Xerxes
placed him selfe on a marvelous steepe highe hill, from whence he
might descerne his whole fkete, and the ordering of his army by sea,
above the temple of Hercules, as Phanodemus writeth. Which is the
narrowe waye or channell betwext the Ile of SALAMINA, and the coast of
ATTICA: or as Acestodorus sayeth, upon the confines of the territories
of MEGARA, above the pointe which they commonly call the hornes. There
Xerxes set up a throne of golde, and had about him many secretaries,
to write all that was done in the battel. But as Themistocles was
sacrificing unto the goddes in his galley that was admiral, they
brought to him three young prisoners, fayer of complexion, richely
arrayed with gold and juellss, whom they sayed were the children of
Sandauce the kings sister, and of prince Autarilus. So soone as
Euphrantides the soothesayer had seene them, and at their arrivall
observed there rose a great bright flame out of the sacrifice, and at
the very selfe same instant that one on his right hand had sneesed: he
tooke Themistocles by the hand, and willed him to sacrifice all those
three prisoners unto the god Bacchus, surnamed Omeiles, as much to
saye, as the cruell Bacchus: for in doing it, the GREECIANS should not
only be saved, but they should have the victorie over their
enemies. Themistocles woundred much, to heare so straunge and terrible
a commaundement of the soothsayer. Nevertheles, the comon sorte
following his custome, which is, to promise safety soner in the
greatest daungers, and most desperate cases, by straunge and
unreasonable, rather then by reasonable and ordinary meanes: they
beganne to call upon the god with one voyce, and bringing the three
prisoners neere unto the altar, they compelled him to performe the
sacrifice in that sorte as the soothesayer had appointed. Phanias
Lesbian, an excellent philosopher, and well seene in stories and
antiquities, reporteth this matter thus. AS for the number of the
shippes of the barbarous navie: AEschylus the poet, in a tragedie
which he intituled the PERSIANS, knowing certainely the trothe, sayeth
thus: THEMISTOCLES King Xerxes had, a thousand shippes I knowe,
amongst the which, two hundred were (I trowe) and seven: which all the
rest dyd oversayle with swifter course. This is withouten fayle. The
ATHENIANS had nine score, in every one of the which there were
eightene souldiers, whereof foure of them were archers, and all the
rest armed men. Themistocles also did with no lesse skill and wisedom
choose his time and place to fight, forbearing to charge his enemies,
untill the hower was come, that of ordinarie custome the sea winde
arose, and brought in a tough tyde within the channell, which dyd not
hurt the GRECIAN gallyes, being made lowe and snugge, but greatly
offended the PERSIAN gallyes, being highe cargged, heavie, and not
yare of steredge, and made them lye sidelong to the GREECIANS, who
fiercely set upon them having allwayes an eye to Themistocles
direction, that best foresawe their advantage. At the same time,
Ariamenes, Xerxes admirall, a man of great valure and worthiest of the
Kings brethern, bestowed arrowes and dartes as it were from the walles
of a castell, charging the gallye of Aminias Decelian, and Sosicles
Pedian, which were joyned and grappled with him, and fiercely entring
the same, was by them valiantly receyved upon their pikes, and thrust
over borde into the sea. Whose bodie floting amongest other
shippewracks ARTEMISIA knowing, caused to be caried to king
Xerxes. Nowe whilest this battell stoode in these termes, they saye
that there appeared a great flame in the element, toward the cittie of
ELEVSIN, and that a lowde voyce was heard through all the plaine of
THRIASIA unto the sea, as if there had bene a number of men together,
that had songe out alowde, the holy songe of Iacchus. And it seemed by
litle and litle, that there rose a clowde in the ayer from those which
sange: that left the land, and came and lighted on the gallyes in the
sea. O- ther affirmed that they sawe armed men, which did reache out
their hands from the Ile of AEGINA, towards the GREECIAN gallyes: and
they thought they were the ZEACIDES, for whose helpe they all prayed
before the battell was begonne. The first man of the ATHENIANS that
tooke any of the enemies shippes, was Lycomedes, a captaine of a
galyve: who having taken very rich furniture and flagges, did
asterwards consecrate them to Apollo laurell: as ye would saye,
victorious. The other GREECIANS in the fronte being equall in number
with the barbarous shipps, by reason of the straightnes of the arme of
the sea wherein they fought and so straightned as they could not fight
but by one and one, where by the barbarians disorderly layed one
another abourde, that they did hinder them selves with their over
multitude: and in the ende were so sore pressed upon by the GREECIANS,
that they were constrayned to flye by night, after they had fought and
maintained battell, until it was very darke. So the GREECIANS wanne
that glorious & famous victorie: of the which maye truly be affirmed
that, as Simonides sayeth: Was never yet, nor Greeke nor Barbarous
crew that could by sea, so many men subdew: Nor that obteined, so
famous victorie in any fight, against their enemie. Thus was the
victorie wonne through the valliantnes and corage of those that fought
that battell, but especially through Themistocles great policie and
wisdome. After this battell Xerxes being mad for his losse, thought to
fill up the arme of the sea, and to passe his armie by lande, upon a
bridge, into the Ile of SALAMINA. Themistocles, bicause he would feele
Aristides opinion, tolde him as they were talking together, that he
thought best to goe and occupie the straight of HELLESPONT with the
THEMISTOCLES armie by sea, to breake the bridge of shippes which
Xerxes had caused to be made: to the ende, said he, that we that we
may take Asia into Europe. Aristides liked not this opinion: for we
have (said he) fought all this while against this barbarous king, who
thought but to playe with us: but if we shut him within GREECE, and
bring him to fight of necessitie to save his life: such an enemie that
commaundeth so great an armie, will no more stand still as a looker
on, and set at his ease under his golden pavilion, to see the pastime
of the battell, but will prove everie waye, and be him selfe in every
place at all assayes to save him self from such a straight and
daunger. Thus with politicke care and foresight, he maye easely amend
his former faulte committed by negligence, and doe well enough, when
he shall see his life and Kingdome both depend upon it. Therefore
Themistocles, I would thincke not best to breake his bridge at all
which he hath caused to be made: but rather if we could, to build
another to it, to drive him out of EVROPE as sone as we
could. Themistocles then replied: Seeing you thincke this were good to
be done, we must all laye our heades together, to devise, how he maye
be forced to come out assone as we could. They breaking of with this
resolution, Themistocles sent immediately one of the Kings enuches,
called Arsaces, that was one of the gromes of his chamber, whom he
found out amongest the prisoners, and by him he sent this message unto
the King. That the GREECIANS having wonne the battell of him by sea,
had decreed in their counsell, how they would goe to the straight of
HELLESPONT, to breake the bridge of shippes he had caused to be made
there. Whereof he thought good to advertise him, for the goodwil he
did beare him, and to the ende he might bethincke him betimes, to get
him away to the sea within his own dominion, and so passe backe againe
into ASIA as sone as he could, whilest he gave order to his allies and
confederates, to staye following him at the poope. The barbarous King
understanding these newes, was so affrayed, that he hoysed away with
all possible speede. The further foresight and great wisdome of
Themistocles, and Aristides, in marine causes, dyd manifestly appeare
afterwards in the battel the GREECIANS fought before the cittie of
PLATEA, against Mardonius, king Xerxes lieutenante: who having but a
small power of the king his soveraines there, dyd yet put the
GREECIANS to great distresse, and in hazard to have lost all. Of all
the townes and citties that fought in this battell, Herodotus writeth,
that the cittie of AEGINA wanne the fame for valliantnes above the
rest: and of private men, among the GRECIANS, Themistocles was judged
the worthiest man: although it was sore against their willes, bicause
they envied much his glory. For after the battell done, all the
captaines being gotten into the straight of PELOPONNESVS, and having
sworne upon the altar of their sacrifices, that they would geve their
voyces after their consciences, to those they thought had best
deserved it: every one gave him selfe the first place for worthines,
and the seconde unto Themislocles. {Swift+} The LACEDEMONIANS caried
him into SPARTA, where they judged the honour and dignitie to their
admirall Eurybiades: but the wisedome and pollicie they attributed to
Themistocles. In token thereof they gave him an olive braunche, and
the goodliest coche that was in their cittie: and moreover they sent
three hundred of their lusty youthes to accompany him, and conducte
him out of their countrie. They saye, at the next feastes and assembly
of the playes Olympicall that were made after this victorie: when
Themistocles was once come into the showe place where these games were
played, the people looked no more on them that fought, but all cast
their eyes on him, shewing him to the straungers which knewe him not,
with their fin- THEMISTOCLES gers, and by clapping of their handes dyd
witnesse howe much they esteemed him. Whereat he him selfe tooke so
great delite, that he confessed to his familiar friends, he then dyd
reape the fruite and benefit of his sundry and painefull services he
had taken in hande, for the preservation of GREECE: so ambitious was
he of nature, & covetous of honour, as we maye easely perceyve by
certen of his dedes and notable sayings they have noted of him. For
being chosen admirall of ATHENS he never dispatched any causes private
or publicke, howsoever they fell out, untill the very daye of his
departure, and taking shippe: and all bicause that men seeing him ryd
much busines at once, and to speake with so many persones together,
they should esteeme him to be the notablet man, & of the greater
authoritie. Another time he walked upon the sandes by the sea side,
beholding the dead bodies of the barbarous people, which the sea had
cast up upon the shore: and seing some of them that had on still their
chaynes of golde, and bracelets, he passed by on his waye, but shewed
them yet to his familiar friende that followed him, and sayed unto
him: take thou those, for thou art not ThemiUocles. And unto one
Antiphates, who in his youth had bene a goodly young boye, and at that
time dyd scornefully behave him selfe unto him, making no reckoning of
him: & now that he sawe him in authoritie came to see him, he sayed: O
my young sonne, and friend: we are both even at one time (but to late)
growen wise. He sayed the ATHENIANS dyd not esteeme of him in time of
peace: but when any storme of warres were towardes, and they stoode in
any daunger, they ranne to him then, as they ronne to the shadowe of a
plane tree, upon any sodaine raine: and after fayer weather come
againe, they cut awaye then the braunches, and bowghes thereof. There
was a man home in the Ile of SERIPHA, who being fallen out with him,
dyd cast him in the teethe, that it was not for his worthiness but for
the noble cittie wherein he was borne, that he had wonne such
glorie. Thou sayest true sayed he: but neither should I ever have
wonne any great honour, if I had bene ASERIPHIAN, nor thou also if
thou haddest bene an ATHENIAN. An other time one of the captaines of
the cittie, having done good service unto the common weale, made boast
before Themistocles, and compared his service equall with
his. Themistocles to aunswer him, tolde him a prety tale. That the
working daye brawled on a time with the holy daye, repining against
her, that he laboured for his living continually, and howe she dyd
nothing but fill her bellie, and spende that they had gotten. Thou
hast reason sayed the holy daye. But if I had not bene before thee,
thou haddest not bene here nowe. And so, if I had not bene then: where
had you my masters bene nowe? His owne sonne was a litle to sawsie
with his mother, and with him also, bearing him self over boldely of
her good will, by meanes of her cockering of him. Whereupon being
merely disposed, he would saye that his sonne could doe more then any
man in all GRECE. For, sayeth he, the ATHENIANS commaunde the
GRAECIANS, I commaunde the ATHENIANS, my wife commaundeth me, and my
sonne commaundeth her. Moreover bicause he would be singular by him
selfe above all other men: having a pece of lande he would sell, he
willed the crier to proclaims open sale of it in the market place, and
with all he should adde unto the sale, that his lande laye by a good
neighbour. An other time, two men being suters to his daughter, he
preferred the honester before the richer, saying: he had rather have
to his sonne in lawe a man that lacked goodes, then goodes to lacke a
man. {Cicero+} These were Themistocles pleasaunt conceites and
aunswers. But after he had done all these things we have spoken of
before, he tooke in hande to buylde againe the cittie and walles of
ATHENS, THEMISTOCLES and dyd corrupt the officers of LACEDAEMONIA with
money, to the end they should not hinder his purpose, as Theopompus
writeth. Or as all other saye when he had deceyved them by this
subtiltie, he went unto SPARTA as ambassadour, sent thither of purpose
upon the complaintes of the LACEDAEMONIANS, for that the ATHENIANS dyd
inclose their cittie againe with walles, who were accused unto the
counsaill of SPARTA, by an orator called Poliarchus, who was sent
thither from the AEGINETES, of purpose to prosecute this matter
against the ATHENIANS. Themislocles stowtely denied it to them, &
prayed them for better understanding of the trothe, they would sende
some of their men thither to see it. This was but a fetche only to
winne by this delaye, the ATHENIANS so muche more time to rayse up
their walles, and that the ATHENIANS should keepe as ostages for
suertie of his persone, those they should send to ATHENS, to bring
backe the reporte thereof and so it fell out. For the LACEDAEMONIANS
being informed of the trothe as it was, dyd him no hurte, but
dissembling the misliking they had to be thus abused by him, sent him
awaye safe and sounde. Afterwardes he made them also mende and
fortifie the haven of PIRAEA, having considered the situation of the
place, and all to incline the cittie to the sea. Wherein he dyd
directly contrary to all the counsell of the auncient kings of ATHENS:
who seeking (as they saye) to withdrawe their people from the sea, and
to accustome them to live upon the lande, by planting, sowing, and
plowing their groundes. dyd devise and geve out abroade, the fable
they tell of the goddesse Pallas. And that is this, how she contending
with Neptune about the patronage of the country of ATHENS, brought
forth & shewed to the judges the olyve tree, by meanes whereof she
prevailed, and obteined the preheminence. Even so Themistocles dyd not
joyne the haven of PIRAEA, unto the, cittie of ATHENS, as the comicall
poet Aristophanes sayeth: but rather joined the cittie unto the haven
PIRAEA, and the lande unto the sea. By this meanes he made the people
strongly against the nobilitie, and brought the comtnunaltie to waxe
bolder then they were before, by reason the rule and authoritie fell
into the handes of saylers, mariners, pilottes, shippemasters, and
such kinde of seafaring men: so as the pulpet where all the oracles
were made, stoode in the market place of PNyx, and dyd looke towardes
the sea. But the thirtie tyrannes that came in afterwardes, dyd remove
it, and turne it towardes the lande: holding opinion to be strong by
sea, was it that dyd mainteine the authoritie of the popular
state. And that contrariwise they which live by the labour and toyle
of the earthe, doe more willingly like the government of
Nobilitie. Themistocles called to minde another matter also of greater
importance, to make the cittie of ATHENS of a greater power by
sea. For after the retire of Xerxes, and that all the fleete and navie
of the GRECIANS wintered in the haven of PAGASES: he sayed one daye in
an open assembly of the people, that he had thought of a thing which
would be very profitable and beneficiall for them, but it was not to
be tolde openly. The people willed him then to imparte it to
Aristides: and if he thought it good, they would execute it
speedely. Themistocles then tolde Aristides: the thing he had
considered of, was to burne the Arcenal where the GRECIANS navy laye,
and to set on fire all their shippes. Aristides hearing his purpose,
returned to the people, and tolde them: howe nothing could be more
profitable, but with all more unjust, then that which Themistocles had
devised. The ATHENIANS then willed Aristides it should be let alone
altogether. Furthermore when the LACEDAEMONIANS had exhibited their
petition to the counsell of the Amphictyons (that is the generall
counsaill of all the states of GRAECE THEMISTOCLES assembled) howe the
townes & citties of GRAECE which had not bene parties with the
GRAECIANS to the league, against the barbarous people, should be put
of wholy from this counsaill. Themiaocles dowting of the ARGIVES, the
THESSALIANS, and the THEBANS also should by this meanes be exempted,
that the LACEDAEMONIANS would be then the greater number in voyces,
and by this meanes might doe what they would in this counsell: he
spake so consideratly for the citties which they would have thus
discharged, that he made the petitioners in the assembly utterly to
chaunge their opinion. Declaring, howe there were but one and thirtie
citties comprised only the league, and yet that some of them were very
weake and small: and howe it were no reason, that rejecting all the
rest of GRECE, the greatest authoritie of this counsaill should fall
into the handes of two or three of the chiefest citties alone. For
this cause chiefly the LACEDAEMONIANS dyd ever beare him extreme
hatred, and dyd set up Cimon all they could, to be allwayes adversary
opposite unto him, and as it were to bearde him in all matters of
state, and the government of ATHENS. They procured him besides, the
ill will and displeasure of all the friendes and confederates of the
ATHENIANS, for that he went sayling still to and fro alongest the
Iles, exacting money of the inhabitants of the same. And this is to be
knowen by the matter propounded by him to the ANDRIANS (of whom he
would have had money) and by the aunswer they made him, as Herodotus
writeth. Which was, howe he had brought them two mightie goddes: Love,
and Force. And they aunswered him againe, that they also had two great
goddesses, which kept them from geving of him any money: Povertie, and
Impossibilitie. And to make this good also: Timocreon the Rhodian poet
galled him to the quicke, when he sharpely taunted him, for calling
many home againe for money that were banished: and howe for
covetousnes of money he had betrayed, & forsaken, his hoste &
friende. The verses wherein this matter is mentioned, are to this
effecte. Who list commend worthy Pausanias, Xanthippus or good
Leotychides, yet shall I seeme but light thereof to passe, compared
with Valliant Aristides. For yet was naye, the like in Athens towne,
nor never shall come none of like renowne. Themistocles by right and
due deserte, is hated of Latona for his lyes, and for he bare a
traitrous wicked harte, who like a wretche, and nigard did devise, for
small rewardes, his host Timocreon to holde, out of his countrie
Ialison. He tooke for bribe (unjustly yet therewhile) of ready coyne
three talents fayre and bright, revoking such as pleased him, from
exile and banishing full many a worthy wight. Or putting them to
death, without cause tolde, he gate thereby, great heapes of coyne and
golde. But in the ende (O right rewarde for such) this bribing wretch,
was forced for to holde, a tiplig bowthe, most like a clowne or
snuche, at holy feastes and pastimes manifold, which were amongest the
people in those dayes Istmiciane folke, dyd use the like allwayes. And
there he served, hiss gests with cold meat still, whilest they that
tasted of his cookerie, gan wishe that they (to ease their weary will)
had never lived to see the treccherie, of false Themistocles, and that
he might no longer live, which wrought them such despight.
THEMISTOCLES After this, he dyd more openly blase him to the worlde,
when he was banished and condemned: in a songe that had beginning
thus. O Muse, let these my verses be disperst, throughout all Graece,
since they deserve no lesse: and since the truthe which is in them
rehearst, deserveth fame, whom no man should suppresse. They saye the
cause was, why this Timocreon was banished: the friendshippe which he
had with the Barbarous people, and for geving them
intelligence. Whereof Themistocles was one that judicially condenmed
him. Wherefore when Themistocles him selfe was accused afterwards of
the same faulte, Timocreon then made these verses following against
him. Timocreon was not without his pheere, which dyd conferre with
Medes prively, Since others mo, the selfe same blame might beare, mo
foxes lurke in dennes as well as I. Besides these verses, Themistocles
owne cittizens for the ill will they bare him, were contented to heare
him ill spoken of. Therefore while he sought wayes, to redresse all
this: he was driven to use such meane, which more increased their
hatred toward him. For in his orations to the people, he dyd ofte
remember them of the good service he had done them: and perceyving
howe they were offended withall, he was driven to saye. Why, are ye
weary so ofte to receyve good by one man? Many of them were very angry
with him also, when he surnamed Diana (in the dedication of her temple
he made unto her) Aristobule, as much to saye, as the good counseller:
meaning thereby, howe he had geven grave and wise counsell, both unto
his cittie, and to all the rest of the GRECIANS. He built this temple
also neere his house, in a place called Melita, where the hangemen doe
cast the dead bodies of those that were executed, and throwe the
ragges and halters endes of those that were hanged, or otherwise put
to death by lawe. There was also in our dayes in the temple of Diana
Aristobuli, a litle image of Themistocles, which shewed plainely, that
he was not only wise, and of a noble minde, but also of a great
majestie and countenaunce in face. In the ende, the ATHENIANS banished
him ATHENS for five yeres, bicause they would plucke downe his
overgreat corage and authoritie as they dyd use to serve those, whose
greatnes they thought to be more, then common equalitie that ought to
be among cittizens would beare. {democracy+} For this manner of
banishment for a time, called Ostracismon+, was no punishment for any
faulte committed, but a mitigation and taking away of the envie of the
people, which delited to plucke downe their stomaks that to much
seemed to exceede in greatnes: and by this meanes they tooke awaye the
poyson of his malice, with diminishing his glorie and honour. So
Themistocles being banished ATHENS, went to dwell in ARGOS. In this
meane season, Pausanias trecchery fell out, which gave his enemies
occasion to lye heavie on his backe. But he which became his accuser,
and was partener of the treason, was one called Leobotes (Alcmeons
sonne) borne in a village called AGRAVLA. Besides this, the SPARTANS
also dyd sit on his skirtes, and charged him sorely. For Pausanias
never before revealed to Themistocles the treason he had purposed,
although he was his very familliar friende. But after he sawe
Themistocles was banished, and dyd take his exile very unpaciently:
then Pausanias was bolde to open his treason to him, to procure him to
take his parte, and shewed him the letters the king of PERSIA had
written to him, and all to sturre him up against the GRAECIANS, as
against ungratefull and unnaturall people. Howbeit THEMISTOCLES
Themistocles shooke him of, and tolde him plainely he would be no
partener of his treason. Notwithstanding, he never revealed it to any
living creature, nor discovered the practise he intended: hoping
either he would have geven it over, or that shortely it would appeare
by some other meane, considering he so fondly aspired to things of
great daunger, and without purpose or possibilitie. After Pausanias
was condemned, and had suffered paynes of death for the same: they
found amongest his papers, certaine writings and letters, which made
Themistocles to be very sore suspected. Whereupon the LACEDAEMONIANS
on the one side cried out of him: and his enemies and ill willers at
ATHENS accused him on th' other side. To the which he made aunswer by
letters from the beginning, and wrote unto the people, it was not
likely that he (who sought all the wayes to rule, and was not borne to
serve, neither had any minde thereto) would ever have thought in his
heade, to sell his owne libertie, & the GRAECIANS also unto the
Barbarous people their enemies. Notwithstanding this purgation of his,
the people by the procurement of his enemies, sent to apprehende him,
and to bring him before the states of all GRAECE, to be judged by that
counsaill. Whereof Themistocles having intelligence in time, he dyd
convey him selfe into the Ile of CORPHV, bicause the citie there was
greatly beholding to him, for a certen pleasure in time paste he had
done them. For they being at sute and strife with the CORINTHIANS, he
tooke up the matter betweene them, and gave judgement on their side,
and condemned the CORINTHIANS to paye them twenty talents damages: and
did set downe an order, that they should occupie the Ile of LEVCADE in
common together, as ground that had bene inhabited with the people,
aswell of the one cittie, as of the other. From thence he fled to
Epirus, whether being followed by the ATHENIANS, and the LACEDAE-
MONIANS, he was compelled to venter him selfe upon a doubtfull & very
daungerous hope. For he went to yelde him selfe into the hands of
Admetus, king of the MOLOSSIANS. Who having heretofore made certen
requestes unto the ATHENIANS, & being shamefully denied them by meanes
of Themistocles (who then was at his chiefest height and authoritie,
the King was marvelously offended with him: and it was a clere case in
deede, that if he could then have layed handes on him, he would have
bene revenged of him throughly. Howbeit feeling the present miserie of
his exile, he thought he might lesse feare the Kings olde quarrell and
displeasure, then the freshe hate and envie of his
countriemen. Whereupon he went unto king Admetus, trusting to his
mercie, and became an humble Suter to him in a straunge extraordinarie
sorte. For he tooke the Kings litle young sonne in his armes, and went
and kneeled downe before the altar in his chappell: which humble
manner of suinge the MOLOSSIANS take to be most effectuall, and such
as they dare not denie, nor refuse. Some saye that Queene Phthia her
selfe, the Kings wife, dyd enforme him of this their country custome
and manner, and brought her litle sonne also neere unto the
altar. Other write also, that it was Admetus him selfe that taught and
shewed him this inforcing manner of petition, only for a cloke to
excuse him selfe to those that should come to demaunde Themistocles of
him: that by duetie of religion he was so straightly bounde and
restrained, that he might not deliver him out of his protection. In
this meane time, Epicrates Acharnian founde the meanes secretly to
convey Themistocles wife and children out of ATHENS, and dyd send them
privelie unto him: whereupon he was afterwards accused, and put to
death, upon Cimons accusation and motion, as Stesimbrotus writeth. Who
not remembring those matters I knowe not howe, or making THEMISTOCLES
as though Themistocles had not remembred him selfe, doth saye, that
Themistocles sayled into SICILE, where he sought to mary Hierons
daughter, the tyranne of SYRACVSA: promising him if he would let him
have her, he would assure him to conquer all GRECE for him, and to
bring them under his obedience. {Coriolanus+} But Hieron refusing this
offer, Themistocles went from thence into ASIA: but that is not
likely. For Theophrastus writeth in his booke intituled of Kingdomes,
that Hieron having sent certain running horses to the feast of games
Olympicall, and having set up a marvelous riche & sumptuous tent
there: Themislocles made an oration to the GRECIANS, declaring unto
them how they should teare the tyrannes tente in peces, and not to
suffer his horses to ronne with other swifte and light horses, and to
cary away the price in those holy games. Thucydides againe declareth,
howe he went unto the other sea, and imbarked in the cittie of PYDNE,
being knowen of never a man in the shippe, untill such time as the
winde beganne to carie them into the Ile of NAXOS, which the ATHENIANS
by chaunce dyd besiege at that time, where being afeard to be set on
lande, he was forced to bewraye him self to the master of the shippe,
and the masters mate, and wrought them, what with fayer wordes and
what with threates (by saying he would accuse them to the ATHENIANS,
that they dyd not ignorantly receive him in, but hiered for money) so
as he compelled them to sayle on further, and to cary him into
ASIA. AS for his goodes, his friendes saved the most parte of them,
and sent them into ASIA to him. But for those that came to light, and
were confiscate unto the state: Theopompus writeth, they dyd amounte
to the value of one hundred talents. And Theophrastus sayeth, but to
foure score talents only. So that all his goodes was not worth three
talents, when he beganne to goveme the state of the common weale. When
he came unto the cit- tie of CVMA, he perceyved that all the coastes
by sea were layed for him to apprehende him, and that he had many
spyalls upon him: among the which, these were two speciall noted men,
Ergoteles, and one Pythodorus, the reward being very great, for men
that sought their gayne any waye they could. For the king of PERSIA
had proclaymed by sound of trumpet, two hundred talents to him that
brought him Themistocles. Whereupon he fled unto a litle towne of
AEOLIA, called AEGES, where no living bodie knewe him, but his host
only, called Nicogenes: who was the richest man of all the AEOLIANS,
and knewe all the noble men of authoritie that were about the king of
PERSIA. Themistocles continued hidden certen dayes in his house: in
which time, on a night after the feast of a sacrifice, one Olbius,
schoolemaster to Niogenes children, by some secret working of the
goddes, sodainely fell besides him selfe, & beganne to singe these
verses out alowde. Doe thou beleeve, what so the night the tells and
geve thy voice, thy counsell and conceipts Unto the night, in
darcksomnes that dwells, thereon also thy victorie awaites. The next
night following, Themistocles being fast a sleepe in his bed, dreamed
that a snake wounde it selfe round about his bellie, and glided
upwardes to his necke, untill it touched his face, and sodainely then
it became an eagle, & imbraced him with his winges: and so at length
dyd lifte him up into the ayer, & caried him a marvelous waye of,
untill he thought he sawe a golden rodde (suche as Herauldes use to
carie in their handes) whereupon the eagle dyd set him, and so was
delivered of all this feare and trouble he thought him selfe in. The
trothe was, Nico genes had this devise in his heade, howe he might
bring him safe to the king of PERSIAES courte. The Barbarous
THEMISTOCLES nations for the most parte (and specially the PERSIANS)
are of a very straunge nature, and marvelous jealous over their women,
and that not onely of their wives, but also of their bonde women, &
concubines: which they keepe so straightly locked up, that no man ever
seeth them abroade at any time, but are allwayes like housedoves kept
within doores. And when they have any occasion to goe into the
country, they are caried in close coches covered all about, that no
man can looke into them. Themistocles was conveyed into one of these
coches drest after this manner, & had warned his men to aunswer those
they met by the waye, that asked whom they caried: howe it was a young
GRECIAN gentlewoman of the countrie of IONIA, which they caried to the
courte for a noble man there. Thucydides, and Charon Lampsacenian
saye, he went thither after the death of Xerxes, and spake with his
sonne there. But Ephorus, Dino, Clitarchus, Heraclides, and many other
write, that he spake with him selfe. Yet notwithstanding it appeareth
that Thucydides wordes doe best agree with the chronicles and tables,
recording the succession of times, although they be of no great
certaintie. Themistocles being come nowe to the swordes pointe (as it
were) and to the extremitie of his daunger: dyd first present him
selfe unto one Artabanus Colonell of a thousand footemen, and sayed
unto him. Syr, I am a GRECIAN borne, and desire to speake with the
King: I have matters of importance to open to his majestie, and such
as I knowe he will thanckefully+ receyve. Artabanus aunswered him in
this manner. My friend Syr straunger, the lawes and customes of men
are divers, and some take one thing for honest, others some another
thing: but it is most honesty for all men, to keepe and observe the
lawes & manners of their owne countrie. For you GRECIANS have the name
to love libertie, & equalitie above all things: and for us, amongest
all the goodly lawes and customes we have, we esteeme this above the
rest: to reverence and honour our King, as the image of the god of
nature, who keepeth all things in their perfect life and
state. Wherefore, if thou wilt facion thy selfe after our manner to
honour the King, thou mayeft both see him, and speake with him: but if
thou have another minde with thee, then must thou of necessitie use
some thirde persone for thy meane. For this is the manner of out
countrie: the King never geveth audience to any man, that hath not
first honoured him. Themistocles hearing what he sayed, aunswered him
againe. My lord Artabanus, the great good will I beare unto the King,
and the desire I have to advaunce his glorie and power, is the only
cause of my present repaire unto his courte: therefore I meane not
only to obey your lawes (since it hath so pleased the goddes to rayse
up the noble empire of PERSIA unto this greatnes) but will cause many
other people also to honour the King, more then there doe at this
present. Therefore let there be no staye, but that my selfe in persone
maye deliver to the King that I have to saye unto him. Well, sayed
Artabanus: whom then shall we saye thou arte? For by thy speache it
seemeth, thou art a man of no meane state and condition. Themistocles
aunswered him: as for that Artabanus, none shall knowe before the King
him selfe. Thus doth Phanias reporte it. But Eratosthenes, in his
booke he wrote of riches, addeth further: howe Themistocles had
accesse unto this Artabanus, being recommended to the King by a woman
of ERETRIA whom the King kept. Themistocles being brought to his
presence, after he had presented his humble duety & reverence to him,
stoode on his feete, and sayed never a worde, untill the King
commaunded the interpreter to aske him what he was? & he
aunswered. Maye it please your majestie, O noble King: I am
Themistocles the Athenian, a banished man out of my country by the
THEMISTOCLES GRECIANS, who humbly repayreth to your highness knowing I
have done great hurt to the PERSIANS, but I persuade my self I have
done them farre more good then harme. For I it was that kept the
GRECIANS backe they dyd not follow you, when the state of GRECE was
delivered from thraldome, and my native country from daunger, and that
I knew I stoode then in good state to pleasure you. Nowe for me, I
finde all mens good willes agreeable, to my present misery and
calamitie: for I come determined, most humbly to thancke your highness
for any grace and favour you shall shewe me, and also to crave humble
pardone, if your majesty be yet offended with me. And therfore licence
me (most noble King) to beseche you, that taking mine enemies the
GRECIANS for witnesses of the pleasures I have done the PERSIAN
nation, you will of your princely grace use my harde fortune, as a
good occasion to shewe your honorable vertue, rather then to satisfie
the passion of your heate and choller. For in saving my life, your
majestie saveth an humble suter that put him selfe to your mercie: and
in putting me to death, you shall ryd away an enemy of the
GRECIANS. Having spoken thus these words, he sayed further. That the
goddes, by divers signes and tokens had procured him, to come to
submit him selfe unto him, and tolde the King what vision he had seene
in his dreame in Nicogenes house: and declared also the oracle of
Jupiter Dodonian, who had commaunded him that he should goe unto him
that was called as a god, and howe he thought it was the persone of
his majestie, bicause that god and he in trothe were called both great
Kings. The King having thus heard him speake, gave him then no present
aunswer againe, notwithstanding he marvelously wondred at his great
wisedome and boldenes. But afterwardes amongest his familiars the King
sayed, he thought him selfe very happy to mete with the good for- tune
of Themistocles comming to him: and so besought his great god
Arimanius, that he would allwayes send his enemies such mindes, as to
banishe the greatest, & wisest men amongeq them. It is reported also
he did sacrifice unto the goddes, to geve them thankes therefore, and
disposed him selfe presently to be mery. Insomuch as dreaming in the
night, in the middest of his dreame he cried out three times together
for joye: I have Themistocles the Athenian. The next morning the King
having sent for the chiefest lordes of his courte, he made
Themistocles also to be brought before him: who looked for no goodnes
at all, specially when he sawe the souldiers warding at the gates geve
him ill countenaunce and language both, when they behelde him, and
understoode his name. Moreover, Roxanes, one of the captaines, as
Themistocles passed by him going to the King (who was set in his
chayer of state and every man keeping silence) softely sighing, sayed
unto him: O thou Greekishe serpent, subtill and malicious: the Kings
good fortune hath brought thee hether. Nevertheles when he came to the
King, and had once againe made him a very humble and lowe reverence:
the King saluted him, and spake very curteously to him, saying. I am
nowe your detter of two hundred talents, for presenting your self. It
is good reason I should geve you the money promised him that should
have brought you: but I geve you a further warrante, be bolde I charge
you, and speake your minde freely, saye what you thinke of the state
of GRECE. Themislocles then aunswered him. That mens wordes did
properly resemble the stories and imagery in a pece of arras: for both
in the one and in the other, the goodly images of either of them are
seene, when they are unfolded and layed open. Contrariwise they
appeare not, but are lost, when they are shut up, and close folded:
whereupon he sayed to the King, he must nedes require THEMISTOCLES
some further time of aunswer. The King liked his comparison passingly
well, and willed him to appointe his owne time. Themistocles asked a
yere: in which time having pretily learned the Persian tongue, he
afterwards spake to the King him selfe without any interpreter. So,
suche as were no courtiers, thought he only talked with the King of
matters of GRECE. But bicause the chaunge and alteration of the courte
fell out great at that time, the noble men imagined he had bene so
bolde to comon with the King of them also. Thereupon they greatly
envied him, and afterwardes murmured much against him. For in deede
the king dyd honour Themistocles above all other straungers whatsoever
they were. On a time the king had him out a hunting with him, be made
him see his mother, with whom he grewe familliar: and by the kings
owne commaundement he was to heare the disputations of the wise men of
PERSIA touching secret philosophies which they call magike. Demaratus
the LACEDAEMONIAN being at that time in the courte of PERSIA, the king
willing him to aske what giste he would. He besought the king to
graunt him this favour: to licence him to goe up and down the cittie
of SARDIS, with his royall hat on his head, as the kings of PERSIA
doe. Mithropaustes, the kings cosin, taking him by the hand, sayed
unto him. Demaratus, the kings hatte thou demaundest, and if it were
on thy heade, it would cover but litle wit: Naye though Jupiter dyd
geve thee his lightning in thy hande, yet that would not make thee
Jupiter. But the king gave him so sharpe a repulse for his
unreasonable request, and was so angrie with him for it, that it was
thought he would never have forgeven him: howbeit Themistocles was so
earnest a Suter for him, that he brought him into favour againe. And
the reporte goeth, that the kings successours which have bene since
that time, under whom the PERSIANS have had more dealings with the
GRECIANS, then in former dayes: when they would retaine any great
state or personage of GRECE into their service, they wrote unto him,
and promise him they would make him greater about them, then ever was
Themistocles about Xerxes. That which is written to him, doth also
confirme it. For he being stept up to great countenaunce and
authoritie, and followed with great traines of suters after him by
reason of his greatnes: seing him self one daye very honorably served
at his table, and with all sortes of daintie meates, he turned him to
his children, and sayed unto them. My sonnes, we should have bene
undone, if we had not bene undone. The most writers doe agree, that he
had given him the revenue of 3. citties for his allowance of bread,
wine and vittailes: to wit, MAGNESIA, LAMPSACVS, and MYVNTA. But
Neanthes Cyzikenian, and Phanias, doe adde two other citties more,
PERCOTA, and PALESCEPSIA: the one to defraye his charges of apparell,
and the other for his lodging. Afterwards Themistocles going into the
lowe countries towards the sea, to take order against the practises of
the GRECIANS: there was a PERSIAN lord called Epixies (governour of
highe PHRYGIA) that had layed a traine to kill him (having of long
time hired certaine murderers of PISIDIA to doe it) so soone as he
should come into a towne of his government, called the Lyons head. But
as he slept on a daye in his house in the after none, the mother of
the goddes appeared unto him, and sayed, Themistocles, goe not to the
Lyons heade, for feare thou mete with the Lyon: and for this warning,
I doe aske thy daughter Mnesiptolema for my servante. Themistocles
waking sodainely out of his dreame, made his prayer unto the goddesse,
and turning out of the highewaye, fetched another compasse
about. Afterwardes having passed that towne, he tooke his lodging
being benighted: but one of the beastes which caried his tente, fell
by the waye, un- THEMISTOCLES fortunately in a river, and all his
arras and tapestry hangings being throughly wet, his servaunts were
driven to laye them out a drying by moone light. The Pisidians that
laye in wayte, and could not discerne by moone light that they were
hangings layed out to drye, thought it had bene the very tente
Themistocles selfe dyd lye in: where upon they went unto it with their
swordes drawen in their handes, hoping to have taken him sleeping. But
when they were come thither, and beganne to lifte up a pece of the
hangings: some of the people of Themistocles (which kept watche)
perceyving them, ranne upon them, & tooke them. So Themistocles having
escaped this daunger, wondred greately at the favour of the goddesse
which had appeared unto him. In recompence whereof, when he was in the
cittie of MAGNESIA, he built a temple unto Dindymena, and made his
daughter Mnesiptolema prioresse of the same. AS he passed by the
cittie of SARDIS for his recreation, he went to visite the temples,
and offerings that had bene geven there. So he sawe an image of a
mayden in copper, in the temple of the mother of the goddes, being two
yeardes highe, which they called the Hydrophora: as much to saye, as
the water carier. And it was a statue, which him selfe had heretofore
dedicated, and caused to be made, with the fines of those that had
payed forfeytures, for stealing or turning awaye the water course at
ATHENS, at suche time as he was master surveyer of the water workes &
conduites there. Wherfore, whether Themistocles was sory to see this
goodly image a prisoner in the handes of the Barbarous people, or that
he would showe unto the ATHENIANS the greatnes of his credit and
authoritie through all the Kings dominions: he spake to the governour
of LYDIA, and prayed him for his sake that he would send this image
againe to ATHENS. B ut this Barbarous governour was very angry with
his request, and tolde him he would ad- vertise the King thereof. Then
Themistocles beganne to be afeard, and was driven to seeke to the
governours women and concubines, whom he got for money to intreate
him, and so made fayre weather againe with the govemour. But from
thenceforth, he tooke better garde of him selfe in all his doings,
greatly fearing the envy of the Barbarous people. For he progressed
not up and downe ASIA, as Theopompus writeth, but laye a long time in
the cittie of MAGNESIA, quietly enjoying the Kings gratious giftes
bestowed on him: where he was honoured and reverenced for one of the
greatest persones of PERSIA, whilest the King was els where occupied
in the affayres of the highe provinces of ASIA, and had no leysure to
thincke upon those of GRECE. But when newes was brought him, that
AEGYPT was rebelled, by meanes of the favour and assistance of the
ATHENIANS, and that the GRECIANS gallyes dyd scowre the seas even unto
the Ile of CYPRVS, and unto the coastes of CILICIA, & that Cimon had
all the sea in subjection: that made him then to bende all his
thoughts howe to resist the GRECIANS, that their greatnes might not
turne to his hurte. Then commissions went out to leavy men, to
assemble captaines, and to dispatche postes unto Themistocles at
MAGNESIA, with the Kings letters, straightly charging him to have an
eye to the GRECIANS doings, and moreover that he should faithfully
keepe his promise he had made to him. But he, to shewe that he neither
maliced his cittizens, nor was moved with the desire of greatnes and
authoritie he might have growen unto in those warres, or els for that
he thought the Kings expectation would prove to a greater matter, then
he could ende or wade through, considering GRECE was full at that time
of famous captaines, and that Cimon amongest the rest had marvelous
good fortune, & that it should be a reproche to him to stayne the
glorie of so many noble actes, so THEMISTOCLES many triumphes, and so
great victories as Cimon had done and wonne: he tooke a wise
resolution with him selfe, to make suche an ende of his life, as the
fame thereof deserved. For he made a solemne sacrifice unto the
goddes, and feasted at the same all his friends. And, after he had
taken his leave of them all, he drancke bulles bloude, as most men
thincke (or as other saye) poyson, which dispatcheth a man in foure
and twenty howers, and so ended his dayes in the cittie of MAGNESIA,
after he had lived threescore and five yeres, and the most parte of
them allwayes in office, and great charge. It is written, that the
king of PERSIA understanding the cause and manner of his deathe, dyd
more esteeme him afterwards, then he dyd before, and that ever after
he continued to use his friends and familliars in very good sorte. For
he left children behinde him which he had of Archippa (Lysanders
daughter) of the towne of ALOPECIA: Archeptolis, Polyeuctus, and
Cleophantus, of whom Plato the philosopher maketh mention, saying that
he was a good man at armes, but otherwise that there was no goodnes in
him. His other sonnes that were elder, as Neocles, dyed being bitten
with a horse: and as for Diocles another sonne, his grandfather
Lysander dyd adopt him for his sonne. He had many daughters, of the
which Mnesiptolema (which he had by a seconde wife) was maried unto
her halfe brother Archeptolis, for they were not both of one
venter. An other called Italia, was maried unto one Panthides of
Chio. Sybaris, unto Nicomedes an ATHENIAN. And Nicomacha, unto
Pharsicles, Themistocles nephue: unto whom her brethem dyd mary her
within the cittie of MAGNESIA, after the death of their father. This
Pharsicles dyd bring up ASIA, which was the youngest of all his
daughters. Furthermore, his sumptuous tumbe standeth yet in the market
place of MAGNESIA. But that Andocides writeth of his bones, in a booke
he made to his friendes is not to be credited which was: that the
ATHENIANS having founde the ashes of his bones, dyd cast them up into
the ayer, as a devise to sturre up the noble men against the
people. And Phylarchus in his historie (much like unto the fayned
subtilties of a tragedie) bringeth in I can not tell what Neocles, and
Demopolis, for Themistocles sonnes, to move the readers with
compassion. Howbeit no man is so simple, but will judge it straight a
very fayning and devise. Diodorus the cosmographer also, in a booke he
hath written of tumbes and monuments sayeth, by conjecture, rather
then of any certen knowledge: that alongest the haven of PIRAEA coming
towardes the head of Alcimus, there is a forelande in forme of an
elbowe, within the which when they have doubled the pointe, the sea is
allwayes calme, and there they finde a great and long foundation or
base, upon the which there is as it were the forme of an altar, and
that is (sayeth he) Themistocles tumbe. And he supposeth that Plato
the comicall poet doth witnesse it in these verses: Thy grave is set
and plast, comodiously, where passengers and merchants that come by
maye visite thee, and where it maye regarde, all such as seeke that
porte to he their warde. Somtimes also, it maye rejoyce to see, the
bloody fights, upon the sea that be. And furthermore, those of
MAGNESIA dyd institute certen honours unto the issue of Themistocles,
which continew yet unto this daye. And in my time, another
Themistocles also of ATHENS dyd enjoy the same honours, with whom I
was familliarly conversante in the house of Ammonius the
philosopher. The ende of Themistocles Iife.

The Life of Furius Camillus+

Amongest many great matters which are spoken of Furius Camillus, this
seemeth most straunge and wonderful above the rest. That he having
borne the chiefest offices of charge in his countrie,s and having done
many notable and worthy deedes in the same: as one that was chosen
five times Dictator, and had triumphed foure times, and had wonne him
selfe the name and title of the seconde founder of ROME, and yet never
came to be Consul. But the only cause thereof was, that the common
weale of ROME stoode then in such state and sorte. The people were
then at dissention with the Senate. They would chuse no more Consuls,
but other kynde of governours whom they called Tribuni militares:
these dyd all things with like power and authoritie as the Consuls,
yet were they nothing so odious unto the people, by reason of the
number that was of them. For it was some hope to them that could ill
beare the rule of the small number of nobilitie, that the government
of the state being put into sixe, and not into two officers hands,
their rule would be the easier, & tollerabler. Nowe Camillus being at
that time in his best credit and authoritie, and in the prime and
glorie of his doings, dyd not desire to be made Consul without the
goodwill of the people, although whilest he was in authoritie, there
were many times Consuls created. But to all other offices and
dignities, he was called, and chosen. He behaved him selfe in such
sorte, that when he was alone, he made his authoritie comon to other:
and when he had companions and associates, the glorie of all redounded
to him self alone. The cause whereof, was his modestie+ on the one
side, for he commaunded ever without envie: and his great wisedome and
sufficiencie on the other side, for the which all others willingly
gave him place, and yelded to him. The house of the Furians being at
that time of no great fame, he was the first that beganne to set him
self forwards. For in a great battel which was fought against the
AEques and Volsces, he being but a private man at armes under the
Dictator Posthumius Tubertus, was the first that riding out of the
army advaunced him selfe, and gave the charge. And being ronne into
the thighe {Sidney+} at that time with a staffe broken upon his
thighe, he plucked the trunchen out, and retired not for all that: but
geving charge againe upon the stowtest of the enemies, he fought it
out so valliantly to the encoraging of other, that he was the chief
cause they turned their backes. Whereupon, to requite his service done
at that time (besides other honours they dyd him) they made him
Censor: an office at that time of great preheminence and dignitie. In
his office of Censorshippe, he dyd two notable acts. The one very
honest+: CAMILLVS when he brought men that were not maried, to marie
the women whom the warres had left widows, which were in number
many. To this he got them partly by persuasion, and partly by
threatnings, to set round fines upon their heads that refused. The
other very necessary: in that he brought the orphanes to be
contributories, unto taxes, and subsidies, which before payed
nothing. The cause thereof was, the continuall warres, about the which
the common weale susteined great charges: but specially about the
siege of the citie of the VEIANS (which some call VENETANIANS) that
was a very sore burden to them at that time. For it was the capitall
cittie of all THUSCAN, the which for store of armour, and number of
souldiers, was nothing inferiour unto the cittie of Rome. For the
VEIANS being growen to stomake and corage in time, by reason of their
wealth and prosperitie, and for the sundry great battells they had
fought against the ROMAINES, that contended with them for glory+ and
empire: now it fell so out, that they finding them selves weakened by
many great overthrowes, which they had receyved of the ROMAINES, they
did let fall their former peacokes bravery, {Hotspur+} and ambitions
to byd them battell any more in the fielde. Howbeit the inhabitants of
the citde of VEIES having raised the walles, and made very great high
rampers, beganne to fortifie them selves, and made good provision for
armour and munition, besides store of corne, shotte, & other necessary
things: they valliantly, and without feare of any thing, defended the
siege of the ROMAINES, that continued long time, and was no lesse hard
and painefull unto them that did besiege, then it was unto those that
were besieged. For where the ROMAINES were wont before time to keepe
their houses in the winter season, and the field only in the sommer
time: that was the first time they were compelled by the captaines and
Tribuni militares, to buylde fortes, and to in- trenche their campe
with a wall, even in their enemies countrie, and to winter abroade as
they were wont to lye in the campe in sommer. Nowe this siege had
continued seven whole yeres together. The captaines were burdened that
they dyd not their dueties, not stoode manfully to their charge:
whereupon in the end they were discharged, and other captaines placed
in their roomes to followe the siege. Among those, Camillus was one
whom then the seconde time they created Tribunus militaris. Who
notwithstanding dyd nothing then in that siege, bicause it was his
happe by lot, to make warres upon the PHALERIANS, and the
CAPENATES. These people whilest the ROMAINES were occupied other
where, had invaded their countrie, and done them great harme, during
the time of their warre with the THVSCANS. But Camillus having
overthrowen a great number of them in the fielde, had the rest in
chase, and drave them to take their cittie, and dyd shut them up
within their owne walles. The chaunce that happened at the lake of
ALBANVS, about the time the THVSCAN warres were greatest, dyd
marvelously amate the ROMAINES beingno lesse wounderfull, then the
most straunge and uncrediblest thing that could be tolde by man. For
they could not finde out the cause of it by common reason, nor any
naturall grounde: considering it was in the later end of Autunme and
sommer was ended, and that there had not bene much rayne, nor notable
sowthe winds. And although there are many lakes many brooks & rivers
many springs, and other waters in ITALIE: yet some of them dried up
altogether, other ranne but faintely by reason of the drought, & all
the rivers then were (as they are wont to be commonly in sommer) very
lowe, and there was scante any water. But the lake ALBANVS
contrariwise, that cometh from no other place, neither runneth any
whether out of him selfe, being environned all about with hilles
CAMILLVS and mountaines, and where the earthe is good: beganne to
swell, and rise to every mans sight, without any cause at all (but
secret and hidden unto the goddes alone) and went allwayes increasing
alongest those hilles sides, untill suche time as it came to be even
with the height of the highest mountains, gathering upwardes still
without any waves or tempest of weather at all. This at the first,
made poor shepeheardes and heardemen, keeping their cattell
thereaboutes, marvelously affrayed. But at the lengthe when the earthe
and weight of one of the hilles (which kepte in the lake as a walle,
from running over into the felde) beganne to breake by reason of the
waight, and great quantitie of water, that ranne straight with a
marvelous extreme force and violence over all the arrable landes and
groundes planted with trees, and so tooke his course into the sea: the
ROMAINES then not alone, but the whole inhabitants of ITALY were
wounderfully affrayed, and judged that it was some signe and
prognostication of some wounderfull thing to come. And there was no
other newes currante in the campe, which laye at siege of the cittie
of VEIES: insomuch as the very brute of it flewe over the walles of
the cittie, unto them that were besieged. And as it happeneth very
ofte in long sieges, that those which lye in campe doe oftentimes
talke with them that are besieged: there was a ROMAINE who fell
acquainted, and commonly used to talke familiarly with one of the
cittie, who could tell of many olde & straunge things done and
happened, and was very, skillfull above any other in the cittie, in
the arte of divination, or soothesaying. The ROMAINE then tolde him
one daye the violent breaking out of the lake ALBANVS, and perceyving
that the other after he had heard him, was as mery as a pye at the
matter, and that he gibed at their siege: he tolde him further, that
this wounderfull chaunce was not only happened unto the ROMAINES at
that time, but that they had bene acquainted with many other farre
more straunge then this, which he would very willingly open unto him,
to see if there were any remedy, that though the affaires of the
common weale had but harde successe, yet he would procure that his
owne private matters might prosper well with him. The VEIAN aunswered
him, he would heare them with a goodwill, and gave good eare unto him,
hoping to have heard some great secret. So the ROMAINE training him on
still from one matter to another, holding on his waye, untill he sawe
he was a good distance of from the gates of the cittie, he sodainely
cought holde on him, and by strong hand caried him awaye with him, and
with helpe of other souldiers which came ronning out of the campe unto
him, he brought him to the captaines. The VEIAN seeing him self thus
forciblie used, and knowing also that fatall desteny cannot be
avoyded, beganne to declare unto the ROMAINES, the auncient oracles
and prophecies touching the fortune of their cittie: by which it was
reported unto them, that the cittie of VEIES should never be taken,
untill the enemie had caused the water of the lake ALBANVS (which
should breake out) to be brought backe againe, and to turne it some
other waye from thence, that it should not fall into the sea. This was
caried unto the Senate at ROME, to be consulted of in counsail: and
there it was determined they should send to the orade of Apollo, at
the cittie of DELPHES, and aske him what they should doe therein. So
thithe rwere sent great and notable men, Cossus Licinius, Valerius
Politus, and Fabius Ambustus: who having ended their jorney by sea,
and receyved aunswer of that they demaunded, returned home againe, and
amongest other oracles they brought one that sayed thus. That through
negligence they had omitted some auncient ceremonies in the holy dayes
of the Latines. And another willed them, that they should by all
possible meanes they CAMILLVS could, keepe the water of the lake
ALBANVS that it fell not into the sea, and should (if it were
possible) bring it backe againe into his old place: if not, that yet
they should cut as many trenches and ditches as might be, that it
might be droncke up in the middest of the fields. When these oracles
were understanded, the priests prepared all things for divine service,
and the people went about the water of the lake to turne it
againe. After these things were done, the Senate in the tenth yere of
the warres againist the VEIANS, put of all those which dyd beare
office, and created Camillus Dictator, who named for generall of the
horse men, Cornelius Scipio. And before he went in hande with any
thing, he made a vowe unto the goddes, that if it pleased them to
graunte a happy ende of these warres, in honour of them he would
celebrate great playes, and buyld a temple unto the goddesse which the
ROMAINES call Matuta: which seemeth to be her whom we call Leucothea,
considering the ceremonies done in these sacrifices. For they cause a
chamber mayde to enter into her temple, and there they boxe her about
the eares. Then they put her out of the temple, and doe embrace their
brothers children rather then their owne. They make many other
ceremonies, and they are much like unto those that are done unto
Bacchus nurces, and to the misfortunes that chaunced unto Ino, by
reason of her hushands concubine. After all these vowes and prayers
made, he entred with his army into the FALISSIANS territories, whom he
overthrewe in a great battell, together with the CAPENATES also, which
came to ayde them. From thence he went to the siege of the cittie of
VEIES, where perceiving to take it by assaulte, was not to be wonne
without great daunger: he beganne to undermine it (finding the earth
all about very minable) and with all so deepe, that the enemies could
perceyve nothing. Nowe when this mining fell out according to his good
hope, he gave an assaulte to the walles in all places alike about the
cittie at one instante, to bring out all the inhabitants of the cittie
to man the walles. Whilest they were all thus upon the walles to make
defence: Camillus souldiers entred secretly through the mines within
the castell, harde by the temple of Juno: which was the chiefe Churche
of all the cittie, and whereunto the cittizens had most devotion. They
saye that even at that present time the generall of the THUSCANS dyd
sacrifice unto the goddes, and that his soothesayer having considered
the intrells of the beastes offered up in sacrifice, cried out alowde,
that the goddes gave the victorie unto him, which should happen to
come upon them in this sacrifice. The ROMAINES which were within the
mine hearing this, brake the earth incontinently, and leaped out,
crying, and making noyse with their weapons: wherewith the enemies
were so astonied, that they fled upon it, & so the ROMAINES tooke the
intrells, & caried them unto Camillus. And these be even much like the
Poets tales & fables. Howbeit Camillus having by this meanes taken the
cittec, & seeing from the toppe of the castell the infinite goodes &
riches within the cittle, which the souldiers spoyled & made havoke
of, he wept for very pittie. And when those that were about him tolde
him he was a happy man: he lift up his handes unto heaven, & made this
prayer. O mightic god Iupiter, and you O goddes, which see and judge
mens good and ill worckes: you knowe right well, that we have not
willingly (without wrong & cause offered us) begonne this warre, but
justly, {just_war+} and by compulsion, to be revenged of a cittie our
enemie, which hath done us great injuries. But if to contervayle this
our great good prosperitie, and victorie, some bitter adversitie and
overthrowe be pre- destined unto us: I beseeche you then (most
mercifull goddes) in sparing our cittie of ROME, and this her army,
you will (with as litle hurte as maye be) let it all fall and CAMILLVS
light upon my persone alone. And as he had spoken these wordes, and
was turning on his right hande (according to the manner of the
ROMAINES after they have prayed unto the goddes) he fell downe flat
before them all. The standers by taking this fall for an ill token,
were somwhat troubled with the matter: but after he got up on his
feete againe, he tolde them that the thing he requested of the goddes
was happened unto him. And that was, a litle hurte, in exchaunge of a
great good fortune. So the whole cittie being spoyled and rifled, he
was also desirous to carie Junos image to ROME, to accomplishe the
vowe he had made. And having sent for worckemen for this purpose, he
dyd sacrifice first unto the goddesse, beseching her to accept well of
the ROMAINES good will, and that she would willingly vowchesafe to
come and dwell with the other goddes, who had the protection of the
cittie of ROME. Some saye, that the image aunswered, she was
contented. But Livius writeth that Camillus made this prayer, as he
touched the image, and that the assistants aunswered she was
contented, and would goe with a goodwill. Yet they which doe affirme,
it was the image selfe that spake, doe favour this miracle, grounding
their proofe upon the opinion of the fortune of ROME: the which, from
so base and meane beginning had impossibly attained unto so highe
glorie and power as it had, without the singular favour of the goddes,
and that hath manifestly appeared unto the world, by sundry great
proofes and examples. They bring forth also such other like
wonders. AS, that images have heretofore let fall droppes of swet from
them: that they have bene heard to sighe: that they have turned: and
that they have made certen signes with their eyes, as we finde written
in many auncient stories. And we could our selves also tell such like
wonders, which we have heard men of our time affirme which are not
uncredible, not lightly to be condemned. But for such matters, it is
as daungerous to geve to much credit to them, as also to discredit
them to much, by reason of the weaknes of mans nature, which hath no
certen boundes, nor can rule it self, but ronneth somtimes after
vanitie and superstition, and otherwhile also dispiseth and contemneth
holy and divine matters: and therefore the meane is the vertue, and
not to goe to farre in this, as in all other things besides, it is the
best. Nowe Camillus, whether his late enterprise performed, in winning
a cittie that stoode out with ROME, and helde siege with them tenne
yeres together, had put him into an overwening or conceipt of him
selfe: or that the wordes of the people, which dyd blesse and prayse
him, had made him looke highe, and presume upon him selfe, more then
became the modestie of a civill magistrate, and governour of the
common weale, and one that was subject to the lawe: he shewed a
stately triumphe, set forth with all riche furniture, and specially
for that him self was caried through ROME upon his triumphant charret
drawen with foure fayer white coursers. This, never captaine nor
generall before him durst undertake to doe, neither any ever after him
attempted it: for they thinke it is a sacred cariage, and only mete
for the King, and father of the goddes. This bred him much envy
amongst the cittizens, which had not bene acquainted with so great
statelynes. There was another occasion also that made them mislike him
much: which was, bicause he stood against the lawe put forth that they
should devide the cittie of ROME. For the Tribunes of the people dyd
set out an Edict, that the Senate and people of ROME should be devided
into two partes: and that those on whom the lotte should fall, should
abide still in ROME, and the other should goe dwell in the newe wonne
cittie of VEIES. These were the reasons to persuade this: that both
the one and the other sorte should be richer then they were before,
and CAMILLVS should more easely keepe their lands and goodes from the
invasion of their enemies, by meanes of these two great citties. The
people which were multiplied nowe into great numbers, and had served
duetifully and daungerously, thought it the best waye in the
worlde. Therefore they still cried out, and thronged with great
tumulte, about their pulpit for orations, praying that this lawe might
be put unto the voyces of the people. But the whole Senate, and wisest
cittizens among them, judging this motion of the Tribunes would be the
destrudion, and not the division of the cittie of ROME: could in no
wise abide it should goe any further. Whereupon they went and prayed
Camillus helpe: who fearing to bring it to the pointe, whether the
lawe should passe or no, dyd allwayes seeke new occasions and letts,
still to delaye and put of the matter, and staye the confirmation of
this lawe. For these causes, he was hated of the common people. But
the originall and apparant cause of the peoples ill will towards him,
was for taking from them the tenth parte of their spoyles: and it was
not altogether without some reason, and to saye truely the people dyd
him much wrong to beare him such malice for that. For before he went
to the cittie of VEIES, he made a solenine vowe to offer the tenth
parte unto the goddes, of the spoyles of the cittie, if he wanne the
same. But when it was taken and sacked, whether it was that he was
lothe to trouble the cittizens, or having a worlde of busines in his
head, that he easely forgate his vowe: he suffered the souldiers to
devide the spoyle amongest them, and to take the benefit to them
selves. Shortely after he was discharged of his charge, he dyd enforme
the Senate of his vowe. Furthermore, the soothesayers made reporte at
that very time, howe they knew by certaine signes and tokens of their
sacrifices, that the goddes were offended for somwhat, and howe they
must of necessitie be pacified againe. Where- upon the Senate
presently made an order, where it was unpossible every man should
bring in againe the selfe same things he had gotten, to make a newe
division of every mans share: that every one therefore upon his othe
should present the tenthe parte of his gaynes he had gotten by that
bootie. There was great trouble about it. They were driven to use
great extremitie to the poor souldiers (which had traveled sore, and
taken great paynes in the warres) to make them to restore backe such a
coloppe out of their gaine, and the rather bicause many of them had
already spent it every penney: and for this trouble, they all cried
out with open mouth against Camillus. But he being set up, and not
knowing otherwise howe to excuse him selfe, was forced to bring forth
as cold and as unreasonable an excuse as he could make, which was:
forsoothe he had forgotten his vowe he had made. The people
notwithstanding were eger still against him, saying: howe he had vowed
then to offer the tenth parte of the enemies goodes to the goddes, and
that nowe he would performe it with the tenthes of the cittizens
goodes. Nevertheles, every man having brought that he should for his
parte: it was thought good they should cause a massie cuppe of golde
to be made, to send to the temple of Apollo at DELPHES. And small
store of golde being in the cittie of ROME, as the officers of the
cittie were serching up and downe to get it: the women of ROME of
their owne voluntary willes without motion, agreed among them selves,
that they would departe with all the juells they had, towardes the
making up of this offering, which came to the weight of eight
talents. In recompence whereof, to honour them withall: the Senate
ordeined that they should be praysed openly with funerall orations at
their buriall, as they dyd use at honorable and noble mens
obsequies. For before that lawe, it was not the manner to prayse women
openly at their funeralles. Nowe there CAMILLVS were appointed three
of the noblest men of the cittie to to go to carie this offering, and
they sent them out in a galley well manned, stored also with good
mariners, and trimly set forth in a triumphing manner; howbeit both in
storme , and calme weather, they were in daunger of their lives. For
after that they had scaped drowning very narrowly by tempest, when the
winde was downe againe, they fell into another daunger, which they
escaped also beyond all hope. For harde by the Iles of AEOLVS, the
gallyes of the LIPARIANS fell upon them, as if they had bene
rovers. Butwhen the LIPARIANS sawe they made no resistance, and
entreated them, holding up their hands: they gave no further charge
upon them, but only fastened their gallye unto theirs. So then they
bad haled them to the shore, they declared they were pirates, and
offered to make porte sale of the men and goodes, as if they had bene
a lawfull prise: & had solde them in deede, had not the wisedome and
authoritie of Timesitheus letted them, who was governour at that time
of the cittie, and had great a doe to persuade them to let them
goe. And he dyd not so leave them, but sent out certaine of his owne
shippes to accompanie them in their jorney, who dyd helpe them to goe
and performe their offering. For which curtesie of his, the ROMAINES
afterwardes dyd him great honout at ROME, according to his well
deserving. The Tribunes of the people beganne nowe to set a foote
againe the lawe for the deviding of the inhabitans of ROME unto the
cittie of VEIES. But the warres of the FALISCES fell out happely at
that time, wherby the noble men dyd choose such officers as they
would. So they chose Camillus, Tribunus militaris of the souldiers,
and five other to assiste him, the service in that case requiring a
generall, that caried both authoritie and reputation among them, as an
olde experienced souldier in the warres. When the people had confirmed
the election, Camillus immediatly entred the territories of the
FALISCES with the ROMAINES armie, where he layed siege unto the cittie
of the FALERIANS, being very well fortified, vitteled and stored, with
all other munition of warre. Knowing therefore that it was no small
attempt to winne this cittie, and that it would not be done in a
shorte time: he pollitikely sought (whatsoever came of it) to keepe
his countrimen occupied about some thing, and to staye them for going
home, least by repayring to ROME, they should have many occasions to
rebell, and raise some civill dissention. For the ROMAINES dyd wisely
use this remedie: to disperse abroade like good phisicians, the
humours which troubled the quiet state of their common weale at
home. {Hal+} But the FALERIANS trusting in the situation of their
cittie, which was very strong in all partes, made so litle accompt of
the siege: that those which kept not watche upon the walles, walked up
and downe in their gownes in the cittie, without any weapon about
them, and their children went to schoole, the schoolemaster also would
commonly leade them abroade out of the cittie a walking, to playe and
passe the time by the towne walles. For the whole cittie had one
common schoolemaster, as the GRECIANS also have, which doe bring up
their children from litle ones in company together, bicause one maye
be familiarly acquainted with an other. This schoolemaster spying his
time to doe the FALERIANS a shrewd turne, dyd accustomably take all
his scholers out of the cittie with him, to playe, not farre from the
walles at the beginning, and afterwards brought them into the cittie
againe, after they had played their fill. Now after he had led them
abroade thus once or twise, he trayned them out every daye a litle
further, to make them to be bolde, persuading them there was no
daunger. But at the length, one daye having gotten all the cittizens
children with him, he led them within the watche of the ROMAI-
CAMILLVS ES campe and there delivered all his scholers into their
handes and prayed them they would bring him unto their generall. So
they did. And when he came before Camillus, he beganne to tell him
that he was schoolemaster unto all these children, nevertheles that he
dyd more esteeme to have his grace and favour, then regarde his office
he had by this name and title. Camillus hearing what he sayed, and
beholding his threacherous parte, he sayed to those that were about
him. Warre of it selfe surely is an evill thing, for in warres many
injuries and mischieves are done: nevertheles among good men there is
a law and discipline, which doth forbid them to seeke victorie by
wicked & traiterous meanes, and that a noble and worthie generall
should make warre, and procure victorie, by trusting to his own
valliantnes, and not by anothers vilenes & villanie. {fairness+}
{generosity+} Therefore he commaunded his sergeants to teare the
clothes of the backe of this vile schoolemaster, and to binde his
hands behinde him: and that they should geve the children roddes &
whippes in their handes, to whippe the traitour backe againe into the
cittie, that had thus betrayed them, and grieved their parents. Now
when the FALERIANS heard newes that the schoolemaster had thus
betrayed them, all the cittie fell aweeping (as every man maye thinke
for so great a losse) and men and women ranne together one in anothers
necke, to the town walles, and gates of the cittie, like people out of
their wittes, they were so troubled. When they came thither, they saw
their children bringing their schoolemaster backe againe, starcke
naked and bownde, whipping of him, and calling Camillus their father,
their god, and their saviour: so that not only the fathers and mothers
of the children, but all other the cittizens also in generall, dyd
conceyve in them selves a wonderfull admiration and great love, of the
wisedome, goodness and justice of Camillus. So that even presently
they called a counsaill, and there it was concluded they should send
ambassadours forthwith unto him, to put their lives and goodes to his
mercy and favour. Camillus sent their ambassadours unto ROME, where
audience being geven unto them by the Senate, the ambassadours
sayed. Bicause the ROMAINES preferred justice+ above victorie, they
taught them to be better contented to submit them selves unto them,
then to be their own men at libertie: confessing their vertue dyd more
overcome them, then any force or power could doe. The Senate
dispatched letters unto Camillus, giving him commission to doe and
determine as he thought good. So he having taken a certen summe of
money of the FALERIANS, dyd furthermore make peace and league with all
the rest of the FALISCES: and thereupon returned backe againe to
ROME. But the souldiers grudged marvelously at it. For they stoode in
hope to have had the sacking of the cittie. When there was no remedie,
but they must needes returne home emptie handed, they beganne to
accuse Camillus to the rest of the cittizens, as sone as they came to
ROME, saying: he loved not the common people, and howe for spite he
disapointed their army of the spoyle. On the other side, the Tribunes
of the people beganne to revive the lawe, for the deviding of the
inhabitants of ROME, and were ready to passe it by the voyces of the
people. Camillus not fearing the ill will of the commons, dyd boldely
speake, and doe in open presence, all he could against it. So that
plainely he was the chiefest cause, that the people against their
willes (intreate what they could) were driven to {Coriolanus+} let it
alone. But withall they were so spitefull against him, that
notwithstanding his sorowe & misfortune for the death of his sonne
(dying of a sickenes) was great: they would not of malice once take
pittie or compassion of him. The losse whereof (albeit he was of a
very good and curteous nature) was so grievous, and CAMILLVS made him
so unquiet: that being accused before the people, he sturred not once
out of his house, but was locked up with the women, which lamented for
his sonne departed. He that dyd accuse him, was one Lucius Apuleius,
burdening him that he had stolen and taken awaye, parte of the spoyle
of the THVSCANS: & sayed, they had seene certen brasen gates at his
house, which had bene brought out of THVSCAN. Nowe the people were so
maliciously bent against him, that every man might see, if they could
once take him in a trippe, upon any advantage whatsoever, they would
douteles have condemned him. Wherefore calling together his friendes
and souldiers that had served under him in the warres, or that had
taken charge with him, which were many in number: he carnestly
besought them, that they would not suffer him thus vilely to be
condemned, through false and unjust accusations layed against him, nor
to be so scorned and defamed by his enemies. His friends having layed
their heades together, and consulted thereupon, made him aunswer: howe
for his judgment they could not remedy it, but if he were condemned,
they would all joyne together with a very goodwill, to helpe to paye
his fine. But he being of minde not to beare such an open shame and
ignominie, determined in choller to leave the cittie, and to exile him
selfe from it. And after he had taken his leave of his wife and
children, bidding them farewell: he went out of his house to the gates
of the cittie, and sayed never a word. When he came thither, he stayed
sodainely, and returning backe againe, he lift up his hands towards
the Capitoll, and made his prayers unto the godds: that if it were of
very spight and malice, and not of just deserving, that the common
people compelled him thus shamefully to forsake the cittie, that the
ROMAINES might quickely repente them, and in the face of the worlde
might wishe for him, and have nede of him. After he had made these
prayers against the cittizens (as Achilles+ dyd against the GRECIANS)
he went his way and was condemned for his contempte, in the summe of
fifteene thousand Asses of the ROMAINE coyne, which make of Greekishe
money, a thousand five hundred Drachmas of silver: for an AS was a
litle pece of money, wherof tenne of them made a ROMAINE
penney. Howbeit there was not a ROMAINE of any understanding, but
beleeved certenly that some great punishment would follow them
incontinently, and that the wrong and injurie they had done him would
be quickely requited, with some most sharpe and terrible revenge, not
only unpleasaunt to thinke upon, but further more, notable to be
spoken of through the world. There fell out so sodainely upon it, such
mischief toward the cittie of ROME, and the present time also brought
forth such occasion of daunger and destruction thereof, to their shame
& infamie: that it was uncertaine whether it happened by chaunce, or
els it was the handie worcke of some god, that would not suffer vertue
recompenced with ingratitude, to passe unrevenged. Their first token
that threatned some great mischief to light upon them, was the death
of Iulius, one of the Censors: for the RoMAINES doe greately reverence
the office of a Censor, and esteeme it as a sacred place. The seconde
token that happened a litle before Camillus exile, was: that one
Marcus Caditius, a man but of meane qualities and none of the
Senatours (but otherwise a fayer conditioned honest man, and of good
conscience) tolde the Tribuni militares of a thing that was to be well
considered of. For he sayed that the night before, as he was going on
his waye in the newe streete, he heard one call him alowde: and
returning backe to see what it was, he sawe no living creature, but
only heard a voyce bigger then a mans, which sayed unto him. Marcus
Caditius, goe thy waye to morrowe morning to the Tribuni militares,
and byd them looke CAMILLVS quickely for the GAVLES. The Tribunes were
mery at the matter, and made but a jeast at his warning, and straight
after followed the condemnation of Camillus. Nowe as touching the
GAVLES. They came (as they saye) of the CELTAE whose country not being
able to mainteine the multitudes of them, they were driven to goe
seeke other countryes to inhabite in: and there were amongest them
many thousands of young men of service and good souldiers, but yet
more women and litle children by a great number. Of these people, some
of them went towards the north sea, passing the mountaines RIPHEI, and
dyd dwell in the extreme partes of EVROPE. Other of them remained
betwene the mountaines PIRENEI,and the greatest mounta;nes of the
ALPES, neere unto the SENONES, and the CELTORII. There they continued
a long time untill they fortuned in the ende to taste of the wine,
which was first brought Out of ITALIE unto them. Which drinke they
found so good, and were so delited with it, that sodainely they armed
themselves: and taking their wives and children with them, they went
directly towards the ALPES, to goe seeke out the country that brought
forth such fruite, judging all other countries in respest of that, to
be but wild and barren. It is sayed, that the first man which brought
wine unto them, and that dyd procure them to passe into ITALIE, was a
noble man of THVSCAN called Arron, and otherwise of no ill disposed
nature: howbeit he was subject to this misfortune following. He was
tutor unto an orphan childe, the richest that was at that time in all
the countrie of THVSCAN, and of complexion was wonderfull fayer: he
was caeed Lucumo. This orphan was brought up in Arrons house of a
childe, and though he was growen to mans state, yet he would not goe
from him fayning he was so well, and to his liking. But in deede the
cause was, that he loved his maistres (Arrons wife) whom secretly he
had enjoyed a long time, and she him, that made him like his
continuance there. Howbeit in the ende, love having so possessed them
both, that neither parte could withdrawe from other, much lesse culler
that they had long enjoyed: the young man stole her away from him, and
kept her still by force. Arron put him in sute, but he prevayled not:
for Lucumo overweyed him with friends, money, giftes, and charges. But
he tooke it so grevously, that he left his country: and having heard
talke of the GAVLES, he went unto them, and was their guide to bring
them into ITALIE. So they conquered at their first coming all that
country which the THVSCANS helde in olde time, beginning at the foote
of the mountaines, and stretched out in length from one sea unto the
other which environneth ITALIE, as the names them selves doe
witnesse. For they call yet that sea which looketh unto the northe,
the Adriatick sea: by reason of a cittie built sometime by the
THVSCANS, which was called ADRIA. The other, which lieth directly over
agpinst the South, is called the THVSCAN sea. All that countrie is
well planted with trees, and hath goodly pleasaunt pastures for
beastes and cattell to feede in, and is notably watered with goodly
ronning rivers. There was also at that time eighteene fayer great
citties in that country, all of them very strong and well seated,
aswell for to enriche the inhabitants thereof by traffike, as to make
them to live delicately for pleasure. All these citties the GAVLES had
wonne, and had expulsed the THVSCANS, but this was done long time
before. Now the GAVLES being further entred into THVSCAN, dyd besiege
the cittie of CLVSIVM. Thereupon the CLVSIANS seeking ayde os the
ROMAINES besought them they would send letters & ambassadours unto
these barbarous people in their favour. They sent unto them three of
the best and most honorable persones of the cittie, all three of the
house of the Fabians. The GAVLES receyved them CAMILLVS very
curteously, bicause of the name of ROME: and leaving to assaulte the
cittie, they gave them audience. The ROMAINE ambassadours dyd aske
them, what injurie the CLVSIANS had done unto them, that they came to
make warres with them. Brennus king of the GAVLES hearing this
question, smiled, and aunswered them thus. The CLVSIANS doe us wrong
in this: they being but fewe people together, and not able to occupie
much lande, doe notwithstanding possesse much, and will let us have no
parte with them, that are straungers, and out of our country, and
stande in neede of seate and habitation. The like wrong was offered
unto you ROMAINES in old time, by those of ALBA, by the FIDENATES, and
the ARDEATES: and not long sithence, by the VEIANS, and the CAPENATES:
and partly by the FALISCES and the VOLSCES: against whom ye have
taken, and doe take armes, at all times. And as ofte as they will let
ye have no parte of their goods, ye imprison their persones, robbe &
spoyle their goodes, and distroye their citties. And in doing this, ye
doe them no wrong at all, but followe the oldest lawe that is in the
worlde, which ever leaveth unto the stronger, that which the weaker
can not keepe and enjoye. Beginning with the goddes, and ending with
beastes: the which have this propertie in nature, that the bigger and
stronger have ever the vauntage of the weaker and lesser. Therefore,
leave your pittie to see the CLVSIANS besieged, least you teache us
GAVLFS to take compassion also of those you have oppressed. By this
aunswer the ROMAINES knewe very wel there was no waye to make peace
with king Brennus. Wherefore they entred into the cittie of CLVSIVM,
and incoraged the inhabitants to salye out with them upon these
barbarous people: either bicause they had a desire to prove the
valliantnes of the GAVLES, or els to shewe their owne corage and
manhoode. So the cittizens went out, and skirmished with them harde by
the walles: in the which one of the Fabians, called Quintus Fabius
Ambustus, being excellently well horsed, and putting spurres to him,
dyd set upon a goodly bigge personage of the GAVLES, that had
advaunced him selfe farre before all the troupe of his companions. He
was not knowen at the first encounter, as well for the sodaine meeting
and skirmishing together, as for that his glistering armour dimmed the
eyes of the enemies. But after he had slaine the GAVLE, and came to
strippe him: Brennus then knewe him, and protested against him,
calling the goddes to witnesse, howe he had broken the lawe of armes,
that coming as an ambassadour+, he had taken upon him the forme of an
enemie. Hereupon Brennus forthwith left skirmishing, and raising the
seige from CLVSIVM, marched with his army unto ROME gates. And to the
ende the ROMAINES might knowe, that the GAVLES were not well pleased
for the injurie they had receyved: to have an honest culler to beginne
warres with the ROMAINFS, he sent an Herauld before to ROME, to
demaunde liverie of the man that had offended him, that he might
punish him accordingly. In the meane time, he him selfe came marching
after, by small journeys to receyve their aunswer. The Senate hereupon
assembled, and many of the Senatours blamed the rashnes of the
Fabians: but most of all, the priests called Faeciales. For they
followed it very earnestly, as a matter that concerned religion, and
the honour of the godds: declaring how the Senate, in discharge of all
the residue of the cittie of the offence committed, should laye the
whole waight and burden of it upon him alone, that only had done the
facte. Numa Pompilius+, the justest and most peaceable of all the
kings of ROME that had bene, was he that first erected the colledge of
these Faeciales, and dyd ordeine that they should be the keepers of
peace, and the judges to heare and allowe all the causes, for the
which CAMILLVS they should justely beginne any warres. Nevertheles,
the Senate in the ende turned over the ordering of the matter, unto
the whole will and judgment of the people, before whom these priestes
Faeciales dyd also accuse Fabius Ambustus. The people made so litle
accompt of their propounded religion, and honour of the godds in that
case: that in stede of delivering of this Fabius unto the enemy they
dyd choose him for one of the Tribunes of the soldiers with his
brothers. The GAVLES understanding this, were so furious and angrie
thereat, that they would no lenger linger their journeis, but marched
with all spede unto ROME. The people that dwelt by the high wayes
where they should passe by, were marvelously affrayed to see the
multitude of them, and their brave and universall furniture: and
beginning to doubt the furie of their rage, they imagined first of all
that they would destroye all the champion country before them, and
afterwardes would take all the strong citties. They contrariwise dyd
take nothing at all out of the fieldes, neither dyd any hurte or
displeasure unto any bodie: but passing by their citties, cried out
they went to ROME, and would have no warres but with the ROMAINE, and
howe otherwise they desired to be friendes with all the worlde. These
barbarous people marching on in this wise towards ROME, the Tribunes
of the souldiers brought their army to the field to encounter
them. They were no lesse in number then the GAVLES, for they were
fourty thousand footemen. Howbeit most part of them were rawe
souldiers, that had never served in the warres before. They were very
careles of the goddes, and dissolute in matters of religion: for they
passed neither for good signes in their sacrifices, neither to aske
counsaill of their soothesayers, which the ROMAINES were religiously
wont to doe, before they gave any battaill. To make the matter worse:
the number of the captaines having power and authoritie alike, dyd
asmuche (or more then the rest) disorder and confounde their
doings. For ofte times before, in farre lesser matters and daungers
then these, they dyd use to chuse speciall officers that had sole and
soveraine authoritie, which they called Dictators: knowing very well
of how great importance it is, in daungerous times to have but one
head and generall, to commaund all, and to have supreme authoritie of
justice in his hands, and not to be bound to deliver accompt of his
doings to any. The injury also which they had so ungratefully done to
Camillus, brought great mischief and inconvenience then upon them. For
the captaines after him, durst no more commaunde the people roughly,
but ever after dyd flatter them much. When their army was nowe brought
into the field they encamped themselves by a litle river called Allia,
about the eleventh stone from ROME, and not farre from the place where
the same river falleth into Tyber. Thither came the barbarous army to
them, who overthrew them in battell, by their disorder and lacke of
government. For the left pointe or winge of their battell was broken
of at the first by the GAVLES, who charged them so furiously, that
they drave them hedlong into the river. The right wing then retiring
out of the plain, before they had any charge geven, and having gotten
certen hilles hard by them: they had litle hurte, and moste of them
saving them selves, did recover ROME again. The rest that escaped
after the enemies were weary of killing, fled by night unto the cittie
of VEIES, thinking ROME had bene lost, and all the cittie put to the
sword. This overthrowe was on the longest_daye+ in sommer the moone
being at the full: and the daye before fortuned the great slaughter of
the Fabians, of the which were slaine by the THVSCANS in one daye
300. all of a name. The very daye it self was afterwards called
Alliade, of the name of the,' litle river, by the which the
2. overthrow was geven.  CAMILLVS But for the difference of dayes,
that some of them are naturally unfortunate, or that Heraclitus the
philosopher had reason to reprove the poet Hesiodus, for making some
days good, and some dayes ill, as though he understood they were not
all of one nature: we have written and declared our opinion therof in
other places. Yet, bicause the matter delivereth present occasion to
speake of the same, peradventure it wil not be amisse to alleage a few
examples of it only. It fortuned the BOEOTIANS on a time to winne two
honorable victories, on the first daye of the moneth they call
Hippodromus (and which the ATHENIANS call Hecatombaeon) that is now
the moneth of June, by either of the which they did still restore the
GRECIANS to their libertie. The first was the battell of LEVCTRES. The
second was the battell of GERASTE, which was two hundred yeres before
when they over came LATTAMIAS, and the THESSALIANS in battell. The
PERSIANS contrarily were overcome in battail by the GRECIANS, the sixt
daye of August, at the jorney of MARATHON. The third day, at the
battell of PLATEES. And on the selfe same daye, neere unto MYCALA. On
the five and twenty daye, at the fight of ARBELES, the ATHENIANS wanne
the battell by sea, neere unto Ile of NAXOS, under the charge and
government of Chabrias, about the full of the moone, in the moneth of
August. And on the twenty of the same moneth, they wonne the battell
of SALAMINA: as we have written more amplie in our historie of
difference of dayes. The moneth of Aprill also brought to the
barbarous people many notable losses. For Alexander the great,
overcame the generall of the king of PERSIA, at the fielde of GRANICA,
in the sayed moneth. The CARTHAGINIANS also were vanquished in SICILE
by Timoleon, on the seven and twenty daye thereof. On which daye also
it is thought the cittie of TROYE was taken: as Ephorus, Callisthenes,
Damastes, and Phylarchus, have writ- ten in their histories. Nowe
contrariwise. The moneth of Julye, which the BOEOTIANS call Panemus,
hath not bene gratious to the GRECIANS. For on the seven daye of the
same, they were overthrowen by Antipater at the battell of CRANON,
which was their utter destruction. They had before also lost a battell
the same moneth, neere unto the Cittie of CHAERONEA, by king
Phillippe. On the same daye also, and in the very self moneth and
yere, those which came into ITALIE with king Archidamus, were slaine
every one of them, by the barbarous people of the country. The
CARTHAGINIANS also feare the seven and twenty daye of the same moneth,
as the daye which had before time brought them into many great and
sorowfull calamities. Contrarilie also, I knowe very well, how about
the feast of mysteries, the cittie of THEBES was destroyed by
Alexander, and that the ATHENIANS were compelled to receyve a garrison
of souldiers into their cittie, about the twenty daye of August, at
which time they made the holie procession of the mysteries of
Iacchus. And on the self day the ROMAINES lost their armie, and their
generall Capio, who was slaine by the CIMBRES. And how afterwards
under the leading of Lucullus, they overcame king Tigranes, and the
ARMENIANS. And that Attalus, and Pompey also, dyed both on the selfe
same daye they were borne. To conclude, infinite examples of men might
be brought, unto whom after like revolutions of time, there happened
notable chaunces of good or ill. But to returne againe unto our
historie. The daye of this overthrowe, is one of those which the
ROMAINES take for one of the unfortunatest dayes that ever came unto
them. And by reason of that day, they reckon two other dayes ne of
every moneth very unfortunate, engendred through feare & superstition,
which spreadeth farre (as commonly it doth) upon such sinister
misfortunes. But for this matter, we have written it more largely and
exquisitly in CAMILLVS the booke we made, of the ceremonies and
customes of the ROMAINES. Now after this battell lost, if the GAVLES
had hottely pursued the chase of their flying enemies, nothing could
have saved ROME from being taken, and the inhabitants therof from
being put unto the sword. For the ROMAINES that fled from the battell,
brought such a feare upon those that receyved them, and filled the
whole cittie of ROME with such greif and trembling: that they wist not
what to doe. The barbarous people againe, beleeving litle their
victorie was so great as it was, fell to make good cheere for so great
a joye received, and devided among them the spoyle of their enemies
goods they found in the campe. So gave they time and leysure by this
meanes, to the multitude of people that fled out of ROME to seeke them
some place of safety: and to such as remained still, they left good
hope to save them selves, and to make some provision for
defence. Thereupon they all fortified them selves within mount
Capitoll, and storing it with all kind of vitaill, armor, and
munition, they wholy dyd forsake the rest of the cittie. But the first
worke they tooke in hande was this. They dyd bring into their sayed
forte, parte of their sacred relickes: and the professed Vestalls
brought thither also their holy fire & all other their holy
monuments. Some writers saye, that they had nothing els in keeping,
but the sempiternall fyer, & were so consecrated by king Numa, who dyd
first institute, that the fyer should beworshipped, as the beginning
of all things. For that it is the most motive and quickest substance
that is of all naturall things: notwithstanding, that generation also
is a moving, or at the least not done without motion. For we see that
all other substance which lacketh heate, remaineth idle, and without
action, and sturreth not, no more then doth a dead thing, which
craveth the force and heate of fyre: as the soule it selfe recovering
heate, beginneth somewhat to move, and dis- poseth it selfe to doe,
and suffer some thing. Wherefore Numa being (as they saye) a man of
great learning and understanding, who for his wisedome was reported to
talke many times with the Muses, dyd consecrate the same as a most
sacred thing, and commaunded that they never should suffer that fyre
to goe out, and but keepe it, as they would preserve the lively image
of the eternall God, the only King and maker of the worlde. Other
saye, that the fyer burned continually there before the holy & sacred
things, signifying a kinde and manner of purification, which opinion
the GRECIANS holde also: Howbeit behinde the same fyer, there were
certen hidden things, which in no case any might see, but those holy
Vestall Nunnes. Many also holde an opinion, that the Palladium of
TROYE (as much to say, as Pallas image) is hidden also there, which
was brought by AEneas into ITALIE. Other doe reporte also, that
Dardanus, at that time when he first beganne to buylde the cittie of
TROYE, brought thither the holy images of the goddes of SAMOTHRACIA,
and he dyd offer them up there: and howe AEneas after the cittie was
taken, dyd steale them awaye, and kept them untill he came to dwell in
ITALIE. Some other also, that take upon them to knowe more therein
then the common sorte, doe holde opinion, that there are two pipes not
very great, whereof the one is emptie and standeth open, the other is
full and fast locked up, howbeit they are not to be seene but by these
holy Nunnes. Other thincke also, that these imaginers invented that
they spake of their owne heads, bicause the Vestall Nunnes dyd cast
all that they could put in at that time, into two pipes, which they
buried after in the grounde within the temple of Quirinus: & therefore
that very place carieth the surname at this daye of pipes. Howbeit
they caried about them the most precious things they had, & fled
alongest the river. Where one Lucius Albinus (one of the common
people) flying CAMILLVS also, and having brought away his wife and
litle children, and other household stuffe he had in a carte by
chaunce he lighted upon the Vestall Nunnes in the waye. But so sone as
he perceyved these holy Nunnes (carying the blessed relickes and
juells in their armes, dedicated unto the service of the goddes) all
alone, and that they were wearie with going a foote: he caused his
wife and his children to come out of the carte, and tooke downe all
his goodes also, and willed them to get them up, and flye into some
cittie or towne of GRECE. Thus, me thought I could not well passe
overwith silence, Albinus reverence and devotion he shewed unto the
goddes, in so daungerous a time and pinche of extremitie. Furthermore
the priests of other goddes, and the most honorablest olde men of the
cittie of ROME (that had bene Consuls before time, or had past the
honour of triumphe) had not the harte to forsake ROME: but putting on
all their most holy robes and vestments dyd vowe, and as it were
willingly sacrificed themselves unto the fortune that should befall
them, for the safety of their countrie. And using certain words and
prayers which their high bishoppe Fabius had taught them, they went
even thus apparelled into the great market place, and dyd sit them
downe there, in chayers of ivory, expecting the good will and pleasure
of the godds what should become of them. But with in three dayes
after, Brennus came to ROME with his army: who finding the gates of
the cittie all open, and the walles without watche, he dowted some
devise in it, and feared some privie ambush had bene layed, as one
hardly beleeving to have found the ROMAINES of so base a mind, as to
forsake their cittie. After being enformed of the troth, he entred
into ROME by the gate Collina, & tooke the same, litle more then three
hundred and three score yeres after it was first builded: if it be
true at the least there hath remained any certen chronicles of those
times unto this present daye, considering the trouble and confusion of
that time hath made many things more uncerteine then that, dowtefull
unto us. But so it was, that the rumor ranne to GRECE incontinently
howe ROME was taken, but yet withall somwhat doubtefully and
uncertainely. For Heraclides Ponticus (who was about that time) sayeth
in a certen booke he wrote of the soule, that there was newes come
from the West parte, that an armie which came from the HYPERBORIANS
had taken a cittie of GREECE called ROME, situated in that country
neere the great sea. But I wonder not that Heraclides (who hath
written so many other fables & lyes) dyd amplifie the true newes of
the taking of ROME, with adding to of his owne devise, of the
HYPERBORIANS, and by the great sea. It is a most true tale, that
Aristotle the philosopher had certain knowledge it was taken by the
GAVLFS: howbeit he sayeth also it was recovered againe afterwards by
one called Lucius: where in deede it was, by Marcus Camillus, & not by
Lucius. But all this in manner is spoken by conjecture. Moreover,
Brennus heing entred ROME, dyd appointe parte of his souldiers to
besiege those which were gotten into mount Capitoll. And he with the
residue of his armie, marched on towards the market place: where when
he saw the auncient Senatours set so gravely in their chayers, and
spake never a word, nor offered once to rise, though they saw their
enemies come armed towards them, neither chaunged countenance nor
culler at all, but leaned softely on their staves they had in their
hands, seeming to be nothing affrayed nor abashed, but looked one upon
another, he marvelously wondred at it. This their so straunge manner
at the first dyd so dampe the GAVLES, that for a space they stoode
still, and were in doubte to come neere to touche them, fearing least
they had bene some goddes: {Satan+} untill suche time, as one of them
went boldely unto Marcus Papyrius, & layed his hand fayer & CAMILLVS
softely upon his long bearde. But Papyrius gave him such a rappe on
his pate with his staffe, that he made the bloud ronne about his
eares. This barbarous beaste was in such a rage with the blowe, that
he drue out his sworde, and slewe him. The other souldiers also killed
all the rest afterwardes: and so the GAVLES continued many dayes
spoyling & sacking all thinges they founde in the houses, and in the
ende dyd set them all a fyer, & destroyed them every one, for despite
of those that kept the forte of the Capitoll, that would not yeld upon
their summons, but valliantly repulsed them when they scaled the
walles. For this cause they rased the whole cittie, and put all to the
sworde that came in their handes, young and olde, man, woman, and
childe. Nowe this siege continuing long, & the ROMAINES holding them
out very stowtely, vittells beganne to growe scante in the campe of
the GAVLES, in so much as they were driven of force to seeke it
abroade without the cittie. Hereupon they devided them selves, whereof
some remained still with the King at the siege of the Capitoll: and
the rest went a forraging, and spoyling all the champion countrie &
villages thereaboutes, scatrered as it were by bandes and companies,
some here, some there, fearing nothing, nor passing upon watch or
warde, they lived in such securitie of their victorie. Howbeit the
greatest company amongest them, went by fortune towardes the cittie of
ARDEA, where Camillus dwelt, living like a private man, medling with
no matters of state from the time of his exile, untill that present
time. But then he beganne not to bethinke him self as a man that was
in safety, and might have escaped the handes of his enemies, but
rather sought to devise and finde out all the meanes he could to
subdewe them if occasion were so offered. Whereupon, considering that
the inhabitants of ARDEA were enough in number to set upon them,
although faynte harted, and cowardly, by reason of the slouth and
negligence of their governours and captaines, who had no manner of
experience in the warres: he beganne to cast out these words among the
young men. That they should not thinke the ROMAINES misfortune fell
upon them, through the valliantnes of the GAVLES, nor that their
calamitie (who had refused good counsaill) had happened unto them by
any worke or acte of the GAVLES, having done nothing for their parte
to make them carie awaye the victorie: but that they should thinke, it
was no other thing, but fortune+ alone, that would needes shewe her
power. Therefore, that it were nowe a notable and honorable enterprise
(although somewhat daungerous) to drive these straungers and barbarous
people out of their countrie: considering that the only ende of their
victorie was, but to destroye and consume as fire, all that fell into
their hands. Wherefore if they would but only take a good lusty harte
and corage unto them, he would with opportunitie, and place, assure
them the victorie, without any daunger. The young men were pleased
with these words of life and comforte. Whereupon Camillus went to
breake the matter also unto the magistrates and counsellours: and
having drawen them by persuasion unto this enterprise, he armed all
that were of age to carie armor, and would not suffer a man to goe out
of the cittie, for feare least the enemies (which were not farre of)
should have intelligence of the same. Now after the GAVLES had ronne
over all the champion countrie, and were loden with all sorts of
spoyles, they did encampe them selves negligently in open fields, and
never charged watch nor warde: but having their full cariage of wine
layed them down to slepe, & made no noyse at all in their
campe. Camillus being advertised thereof by his severall skowtes,
caused the ARDEANS with as litle noyse as might be, forthwith to goe
out into the fields: & having marched somwhat roundly the distance
betwene the cit- CAMILLVS tie, & the campe of the GAVLES, they came
thither much about midnight. Then he made his soldiers make great
showtes & cries, & the trumpets to be sounded on every side, to put a
feare in their enemies, who yet with all the lowde noyse they made,
could hardly be made to wake, they were so deadly dronke. Yet there
were some notwithstanding, that for feare to be taken tardy, dyd
bustle up at this sodaine noyse: and coming to them selves, fell to
their weapons to resist Camillus, which were slayne by and by. The
rest, and the greatest number of them, laye here and there scattered
in the middest of the field, without any weapon, dead a sleepe,
starcke droncke with wine, & were put to the sworde, & never strake
stroke. Those that fled out of the campe that night (which were but
fewe in number) were overthrowen also the next daye, by the horse men
which followed and killed them, as they tooke them draggling here &
there in the fieldes. The brute of this victorie was blowen abroade
incontinently through all the townes and villages thereabouts, which
caused many young men to come and joyne them selves to Camillus: but
specially the ROMAINFS desired the same, that had saved them selves in
the cittie of VEIES, after the battel lost at ALLIA, who made their
mones amongest them selves there, saying. O goddes, what a captaine
hath fortune taken from the cittie of ROME? What honour hath the
cittie of ARDEA, by the valliantnes and worthy deedes of Camillus: and
in the meane season, his naturall cittie that brought him forth, is
now lost, and utterly destroyed?  We, for lacke of a captaine to leade
us, are shut up here within others walles, & doe nothing but suffer
ITALIE in the meane space to goe to ruine, and utter destruction
before our eyes. Why then doe we not send to the ARDEANS for our
captaine? or why doe we not arme our selves, to goe unto him? For he
is nowe no more a banished man, nor we poore citti- zens: since our
cittie is possessed with the forein power, of our hatefull enemies. So
they all agreed to this counsaill, and sent unto Camillus to beseche
him to be their captaine,& leade them. But he made aunswer, he would
in no case consent unto it, unles they that were besieged in the
Capitoll had lawfully first confirmed it by their voyces. For those
(sayed he) so long as they remaine within the cittie, doe represent
the state and bodie thereof. Therefore if they commaunded him to take
this charge upon him, he would most willingly obey them: otherwise
they misliked of it, that then he would not medle against their good
willes & commaundement. They having receaved this aunswer, there was
not a ROMAINE amongest them, but greatly honored & extolled the
wisedome and justice of Camillus. But nowe they knewe not how to make
them privie to it, that were besieged in the Capitoll: for they sawe
no possibilide to convey a messenger to them: considering the enemies
were lordes of the cittie, and layed seige to it. Howbeit there was
one Pontius Cominius amongest the young men (a man of a meane house,
but yet desirous of honour and glory) that offered him self very
willingly to venter to get in if he could. So he tooke no letters to
cary to them which were besieged, for feare least they might be
intercepted, & so they should discover Camillus intention: but putting
on an ill favoured gowne upon him, he conveyed certen peces of corcke
under it, and traveling at none dayes kept on his waye without feare,
untill he came to ROME, bringing darke night with him. And bicause he
could not passe over the bridge, for that the barbarous people kept
watche upon it: he wrapped such clothes as he had, about his necke
(which were not many, nor heavy) and tooke the river, & swimming with
these corcks he had brought, at the length he got over to the other
side where the cittie stoode. Then taking up those lanes allwayes
where he CAMLLLVS thought the enemies were not, seeing fire, and
hearing noyse in other places, he went to the gate Carmentale, where
he found more silence then in other places: on the which side also,
the hill of the Capitoll was more stepe & upright, by reason of the
great rocks that were harde to clime up upon. But he digged and crept
up so long amongest them, that he got up with great payn unto the wall
of the fortresses on the which side also the enemie kept no watch: and
saluting the watche of the Capitoll, he told them what he was. So they
plucked him up unto them, and brought him to the magisrates that ruled
then. Who caused the Senate to assemble presently, unto whom he told
the newes of Camillus victorie, which they had not heard of before:
and therewith also he dyd declare unto them, the determination of the
ROMAINE souldiers that were abroade, which was, to make Camillus their
captaine and general, and did persuade them also to graunt him the
charge, for that he was the only man abroad whom the cittizens gave
their consents to obey. When they heard this, all that were within the
Capitoll, consulted thereupon amongest them selves, and so did chuse
Camillus Dictator, and returned the messenger Pontius Cominius backe
againe, the self same way he came unto them. His fortune in returning
backe, was like unto his coming thither: for the enemies never sawe
him. And so he brought reporte unto them that were abroad, of the
Senates decree and consent, whereof they all were marvelous glad. Thus
came Camillus to take this charge of generall upon him, and found
there were twenty thousand good fighting men abroade, and well
armed. Then got he further ayde also of their allies and confederates,
and prepared daylie to goe and set upon the enemies. So was Camillus
chosen nowe Dictator the seconde time, & went unto the cittie of
VEIES, where he spake with the ROMAINE souldiers that were there, and
leavied a great number of the allies besides, to goe fight with the
enemies as sone as he could. But whilest Camillus was thus a
preparing, certen of the Barbarous people in ROME, walking out by
chaunce on that side of the Capitoll where Pontius Cominius had gotten
up the night before, spied in divers places the printes of his feete
and hands, as he had griped and gotten holde, still digging to get up,
and sawe the weedes and erbes also growing upon the rocks, and the
earth in like manner, flat troden down. Whereupon they went presently
unto the King, to let him understande the same: who forthwith came to
vewe the place. And having considered it well, he did nothing at that
time: but when darke night was come, he called a companie of the
lightest GAVLES together, & that used most to digge in mountaines, and
sayed unto them. Our enemies them selves doe shew us the waye how to
take them, which we could not have founde out but by them selves. For
they having gone up before us, do geve us easely to understande, it is
no impossible thing for us to clime up also. Wherefore, we were
utterly shamed, having already begonne well, if we should fayle also
to end well: and to leave this place as unvincible. For if it were
easie for one man alone, by digging to clime up to the height thereof-
much lesse is it harde for many to get up one after another, so that
one doe helpe another. Therefore Syrs, I assure you, those that doe
take paynes to get up, shalbe honorably rewarded, according to their
just deserte. When the King had spoken these wordes unto the GAVLES,
they fell to it lustely every man to get up: & about midnight, they
beganne many of them to digge, and make stepps up to the rocke one
after another, as softly as could possibly, with catching holde the
best they could, by the hanging of the rocke, which they found very
steepe, but nevertheles easier to clime, then they tooke it at the
beginning. So that the formest of them be- CAMILLVS ing come to the
toppe of the rocke, were now ready to take the walle, and to set upon
the watche that slept: for there was neither man nor dogge that heard
them. It chaunced then there were holy gese kept in the temple of
Juno, which at other times were wont to be fed till their croppes were
full: but vittells being very straite, & scante at that time even to
finde the men, the poore gese were so hard handled, and so litle
regarded, that they were in manner starved for lacke of meate. This
fowle in deede naturally is very quicke of hearing, and so is she also
very fearefull by nature: and being in manner famished with their
harde allowance, they were so much the more waking, and easier to be
afrayed. Upon this occasion therfore, they heard the comming of the
GAVLES, and also beganne to ronne up and downe and crie for feare:
with which noyse they did wake those that were within the castell. The
GAVLES being bewrayed by these foolishe gese, left their stealing upon
them, and came in with all the open noyse and terrour they could. The
ROMAINES hearing this larum, every man took such weapon as came first
to his hand, and they ranne sodainely to rescue that place from whence
they understoode the noyse: among those, the formest man of all was
Marcus Manlius, a man that had bene Consul, who had a lusty bodye, and
as stowte a harte. His happe being to mete with two of the GAVLES
together, as one of them was lifting up his axe to knocke him on the
head, he prevented him, and strake of his hand with his sword, and
clapt his target on the others face so fiercely, that he threwe him
backward down the rocke: and comming afterwards unto the walle with
others that ranne thither with him, he repulsed the rest of the GAVLES
that were gotten up, who were not many in number, neither did any
great acte. Thus the ROMAINES having escaped this daunger, the next
morning they threw the captaine hedlong down the rocks from the
castell, who had charge of the watche the night before: & gave Manlius
in recompence of the good service he had done, a more honorable then
profitable rewarde, which was this. Every man of them gave him halfe a
pound of the country wheate, which they call Far, & the fourth parte
of the measure of wine, which the GRECIANS call Cotile: and this might
be about a quarte, being the ordinary allowance of every man by the
daye. After this repulse, the GAVLES beganne to be discoraged, partely
for that their vitailles fayled them, and durst no more forage abroade
in the fieldes for feare of Camillus: and partly also for that the
plague+ came amongest them, being lodged amongest heapes of dead
bodies, lying in every place above ground ,without buriall, and
amongest burnt houses destroyed, where the ashes being blowen very
high by the winde & vehemency of heate, dyd geve a drie persing ayer,
that dyd marvelously poyson their bodies when they came to drawe in
the breathe of it. But the greatest cause of all their mischief was,
the chaunge of their wonted dyet. Who comming out of a freshe
countrie, where there were excellent pleasaunt places to retire unto,
to avoyde the discommoditie of the parching heate of the sommer, were
nowe in a naughty plaine countrie for them to remaine in, in the
latter season of the yere. All these things together dyd heape
diseases upon them, besides the long continuaunce of the siege about
the Capitoll (for it was then about the seventh moneth) by reason
whereof there grewe a marvelous death in their campe, through the
great numbers of them that dyed daylie, & laye unburied. But
notwithstanding all the death and trouble of the GAVLFS, the poore
besieged ROMAINES were nothing holpen the more, the famine still dyd
growe so fast upon them. And bicause they could heare nothing of
Camillus, they were growen almost unto a despaire: and send unto him
they could not, the GAVLES kept so straight watche upon CAMILLVS them
in the cittie. Whereupon both parties finding them selves in harde
state, first the watche of either side beganne to cast out wordes of
peace amongest them selves: and afterwards by consent of the heades,
Sulpitius, Tribune osthe souldiers, came to parle with Brennus. In
which parle it was articled: that the ROMAINES should paye a thousand
pounde weight of golde, and that the GAVLES should incontinently after
the receipt of the same, departe out of their cittie, and all their
territories. This decree being passed by othe from both, the golde was
brought. And when it came to be weyed, the GAVLES at the first prively
beganne to deale falsely with them: but afterwardes they openly payed
the ballance, and would not let them waye no more, whereat the
ROMAINES beganne to be angriewith them. Then Brennus, in scorne &
mockery, to despight them more, pluckt of his sworde girdell and all,
and put it into the ballance where the gold was wayed. Sulpitius
seeing that: asked him what he ment by it? Brennus aunswered him: what
canne it signific els, but sorrowe to the vanquished. This worde ever
after ranne as a common proverbe in the peoples mouthes. Some of the
ROMAINES tooke this vile parte of theirs in such scorne, that they
would needes take the gold from them againe by force, and so returne
into their holde, to abide the siege still, as they had done
before. Other were of opinion to the contrary, and thought it best
with pacience to put up this scorne of theirs, and not to thincke it
was a shame to paye more then they had promised: but only to paye it
by compulsion as they dyd by misfortune of time, was to thincke it
rather necessary, then honorable. And as they were debating the matter
thus, aswell amongest them selves, as with the GAVLES: Camillus came
to ROME gates with his armie, & understanding all what had passed
betweene them he commaunded the rest of the army to marche fayer and
softely after him in good order, and he in the meane season with the
best choyse men he had, went before with all speede. Assone as the
other ROMAINES within the cittie had spied him, they showted out for
joye, and receaved him every one with great reverence, without any
more wordes, as their soveraine captaine and prince, who had power
over them all. And Camillus taking the golde out of the skales,
{cortesy+} gave it unto his men, and commaunded the GAVLES presently
to take up their skales, and to get them going: for, sayeth he, it is
not the ROMAINES manner to keepe their countrie with golde, but with
the sworde. Then Brennus beganne to be hotte, and tolde him it was not
honorably done of him, to breake the accorde that had passed betweene
them before by othe. Whereunto Camillus stowtely aunswered him againe,
that accorde was of no validitie. For he being created Dictator
before, all other officers and magistrates whatsoever, and their
actes, by his election were made of no authoritie: and seeing
therefore they had delte with men, that had no power of them selves to
accorde to any matter they were to speake to him if they required
ought. For he alone had absolute authoritie to pardone them if they
repented, and would aske it: or els to punishe them, and make their
bodies aunswer the damages and losse his cuntry had by them
susteyned. These wordes made Brennus madde as a march hare, that out
went his blade. Then they drew their swordes of all sides, & layed
lustely one at an other as they could, within the houses, and in open
streetes, where they could set no battell in order. But Brennus
sodainely remembring him selfe that it was no even matche for him,
retired with his men about him into his campe, before he had lost many
of his people. The next night following, he departed out of ROME with
all his army, and went to encampe him self about a three score furlong
from thence, in the highe way that goeth towards the cittie of the
GABIANS. Camillus with his CAMILLVS whole army well appointed, went
after him immediatly, and showed at his campe by the breake of
daye. The ROMAINES having taken harte againe unto them, dyd lustely
geve them battell: the same continued longe, very cruell and
doubtefull, untill the GAVLES at the length were overthrowen, and
their campe taken with great slaughter. As for those that dyd escape
the furie of the battell, they were killed, some by the ROMAINES
selves, who hottely followed the chase after the battell broken: the
residue of them, and the greatest parte, were slaine by those of the
citties and villages neere aboute, that dyd set upon them as they fled
scatteringly here and there in the fields. And thus was the cittie of
ROME, straungely againe recovered, that was before straungely wonne
and lost after it had continued seven moneths in the handes of the
barbarous people. For they entred ROME about the fitenth daye of
Iulye: and they were driven out againe, about the thirtenth daye of
Februarye following. So Camillus triumphed as beseemed him, and as one
that had saved and delivered his countrie out of the handes of their
enemies, and set ROME againe at libertie. Those that had bene abroade
all the time of this siege, came into ROME againe, following his
triumphing charret: and those that had bene besieged within the
Capitoll (looking for no other but to have dyed by famin) went and
presented them selves before him, and eche one embraced other, in
weeping wise for joye. The priestes & ministers of the temples also,
presented their holy juells, whole and undefaced, which some of them
had buried in the ground within the cittie selfe: and others some had
caried awaye with them, when they fled out of ROME. All these the
people dyd as gladly see, as if the goddes them selves had returned
home againe into their cittie. After they had sacrificed unto the
goddes, & rendred them most humble thankes, and had purged their
cittie, as they had been taught by men experienced in those matters
for satisfaction of the goddes: Camillus beganne againe to buylde up
the temples that were there before, harde by the which he buylt
another newe one also to the god Aius Locutius, in that very place
where Marcus Ceditius heard the voyce warne him of the coming of the
GAVLES. So by Camillus good diligence, and the priestes great paynes
and travaill, the situations of these temples were with muche a doe
founde out againe. But when they were to buylde againe all the rest of
the cittie, that was wholy burnt, and destroyed to the grounde: the
people had no minde to it, but ever shrinked backe, to put any hande
to the worcke, for that they lacked all thinges necessarie to beginne
the same. Furthermore, waying their late and long susteined trouble
and miseries, they were fitter to take their ease & rest, then to
beginne newe labour and toyle, to kill their hartes and bodies
altogether. For, neither were their bodies able to performe it, nor
yet their goods to reache to the charge of it. Wherefore disposing
their mindes to dwell in the cittie of VEIES, which remained whole,
untouched, and furnished of all thinges to receave them: they
delivered to the pratling Orators (whose tongues dyd never cease to
speake placentia to the people) trimme occasion to set this matter
abroache. So they gave good care, and were willing to heare certen
seditious wordes spoken against CamilIus, which were these. That for
his private ambition he would deprive them of a cittie well furnished
already, and would against their wishes compell them to lodge in their
owne houses, wholy burnt & pulled downe. And moreover, how he would
make them to rayse up againe the great ruine the fire had made, to the
ende the people must call him, not only captaine & generall of the
ROMAINES, but the founder of ROME also, and so drown Romulus honorable
title thereof. The Senate considering of this matter, and fearing some
tumulte CAMILLVS among the people: they would not suffer Camillus to
leave his Distator shippe before the ende of the yere, notwithstanding
no man ever enjoyed that office above sixe moneths. Then Camillus for
his parte dyd much endevour him selfe, to comforte & appease the
people, praying them all he could to tarie: & further pointed with his
finger unto the graves of their auncesters, and put them in minde also
of the holy places dedicated to the goddes, and sanctified by king
Numa, or by Romulus, or by other Kings. But amongest many other tokens
drawen out of holy and divine things, he forgate not to bring for
example, the heade of a man founde newe and freshe, in making the
foundations of the Capitoll, as if that place by fatall desteny had
bene once chosen to be the heade and chief of all lTALIE. And
moreover, that the holy fyer of the goddesse Vesta (which sence the
warres had bene kindled againe by the holy Vestall Nunnes) would
againe come to be put out by them, if they did forsake their naturall
cittie, besides the great shame and dishonour it would be unto them,
to see it habited in time to come unknowne straungers, or els to be
left a common field and pasture, for beastes and cattell to graze
in. Such sorowfull examples & griefes, the honest naturall borne
cittizens, dyd ever blowe into the peoples eares, aswell privately, as
openly. The people againe to the contrarie, make their hartes to yerne
for pittie, when they layed before their eyes their penurie, and
povertie they sussteined: and besought them also not to enforce them
to joyne together againe the broken peces of a spoiled cittie as of a
shippewracke that had cast them naked into the sea, having only saved
bare life and persones) sence that e had another cittie neere at hande
ready to receave them. So Camillus counsell was, the Senate should
consulte upon this matter, and their absolute opinion herein: which
was done.  And in this counsell, he him self brought forth many
probable reasons, why they should not leave in any case, the place of
their natural] birth and country: and so dyd many other Senatours in
like case, favoring that opinion. Last of all, after these
persuasions, he commaunded Lucius Lucretius (whose manner was to
speake first in such assemblies) that he should stand up and deliver
his opinion, and that the rest also in order as they sat, should saye
their mindes. So every man keeping silence, as Lueretius was ready to
speake, at that present time there passed by their counsell house, a
captaine with his bande that warded that daye, who spake alowde to his
ensigne bearer that went formest to staye, and set downe his ensigne
there: for, sayed he, here is a very good place for us to warde
in. These wordes being heard up into the Senate house, even as they
stoode all in a doubte & maze what would be the resolution of this
matter: Lucretius beganne to saye, that he most humbly thancked the
goddes, & allowed of the captaines judgment, & so every one of the
rest in their order, sayed as much. Moreover there was a wonderful
chaunge and alteration of minde sodainely among the common people: for
every man dyd persuade and encorage his fellowe lively to put his hand
to this worke. Insomuch as tarying for no division or appointing out
of streetes, nor setting out every man his place he should builde in:
they fell to worke of all handes, everie one chosing that place he
liked hest, and was most commodious for their building, without any
other order or division amongest them. Whereupon, they ronning to this
building on a head, the streetes were confused on heapes together, and
their houses all built out of order & uniformitie. For the reporte
goeth, that the whole cittie (as well common as private buildings) was
built againe in a yere. But the surveyours, to whom had geven charge
to finde out all the holy places where CAMILLVS the temples had bene
overthrowen: as they went about mount Pallatine, they came by chaunce
to the place, where the chappell of Mars had stoode, which the GAVLES
had wholy burnt and destroyed, as they had done all the rest. They
making cleane the place, and surveying every corner, dyd finde by
chaunce Romulus augures crooked staffe hidden under a great mount of
ashes. This staffe is crooked at one of the endes and they call it
Lituus, which soothesayers doe use to quarter out the regions of the
element, when they will beholde the flying of birdes to tell of things
to come. Romulus that was very skillfull in this arte, dyd use this
staffe: and after he was taken awaye from all mens sights, the priests
tooke it, and kept it as a holy relicke, suffering no creature to laye
hands on it. Nowe they founde this staffe whole and unbroken, where
all things els were consumed and perished by fire, they were in a
marvelous joye thereat. For they interpreted this to be a signe, of
the everlasting continuaunce of the cittie of ROME. But before they
could make an ende of all their building, there grewe a newe warre
againe upon them. For at one very instante, all the EQVES, the
VOLSCES, and the LATINES, entred with all their might and mayne into
the territories of the ROMAINES. The THUSCANS also went then and
besieged SVTRIVM, that was in league and amitie with the ROMAINES. The
Tribuni militares got them straight to the field with their armie, and
encamped about mount Martian. The LATINES besieged them so
straightely, that their army stoode in great daunger to be
overthrowen, and they were driven to sende to ROME for a newe
supplie. Thereupon the ROMAINES dyd choose Camillus Dictator againe
the third time. The occasion of this warre is reported two manner of
wayes: whereof I will declare the first, which I doe conceyve to be
but a tale. They saye the LATINES sent unto the ROMAINES, to demaunde
some of their free maydes in ma- riage: which they dyd either to make
a quarell of warre, or els as desirous in deede, to joyne both the
peoples againe by newe mariages. The ROMAINES were amased very much at
this, and sore troubled, as not knowing howe to aunswer them, they
were so affrayed of warres. For they were yet scante newe setled at
home, & dreaded much lest this demaunde of their daughters, was but a
summons made to geve them hostages, which they finely cloked under the
name of alliance in mariage. Some saye that there was at that time a
bonde mayde called Tutola, or as some saye, Philotis, that went unto
the Senate, and counselled them they should sende her awaye with some
other fayer maydes slaves, dressed up like gentlewoman, and then let
her alone. The Senate liked very well of this devise, and chose such a
number of bonde maydes as she desired to have, and trimming them up in
fine apparell, begawded with chaines of golde and juells, they sent
them forth to the LATINES, who were encamped not farre from the
cittie. When night was come, the other maydes hyd their enemies
swords. But this Tutola, or Philotis (call her as you will) dyd clime
up to the toppe of a wilde figge tree, from which she shewed a burning
torche unto the ROMAINES, having made shifte to hange somwhat behinde
her, to keepe the light from sight of the enemies. For this signall
the Senate of ROME had secretly appointed her to set up, which was the
cause that the issuing out of the souldiers being commaunded to goe
out in the night, was full of trouble and tumulte. For being pressed
by their captaines, they called one another, and there was great a doe
to put them into order of battel. Thus they went to take their enemies
sleeping, who nothing mistrusting the same, were slaine the most parte
of them within their campe. This was done on the fifte day of the
moneth called then Quintilis, and now is named Julye: at which time
they doe yet celebrate a cer- CAMILLVS taine feast in remembraunce of
that acte. For first of all, going out of the cittie, they call alowde
many of their fellowes names which are most common: as Caius, Marcus,
and Lucius, showing thereby howe one of them called another after that
sorte, as they went in great haste out of the cittie. Afterwardes all
the mayde servauntes of the cittie being trimmely apparelled goe
playing up and downe the towne, pleasauntly jeasting with those they
mete: & in the ende they make as though they fought together, in token
that they dyd helpe the ROMAINES at that time to destroye the
LATINES. Then they are feasted, sitting under bowers made with wilde
figge tree boughes: and this feaste daye is called, Nona Capratinae,
by reason of the wilde figge tree (as some thincke) from the toppe
whereof, the bonde mayde shewed to the ROMAINES the burning
torche. For the ROMAINES call the wilde figge tree, Caprificus. Other
saye, that all these things are done and spoken, in remembrance of the
mischaunce that happened unto Romulus, when he was taken out of their
sight, the same day without the gats of the citty, at which time there
rose a sodain miste and darke clowd. Or as some other saye, that then
was the eclypse of the sunne: and they holde opinion that the day was
named Nona Capratinae, bicause Capra in the ROMAIN tongue, signifieth
a goate. Romulus vanished out of mens sightes, as he was making an
oration unto his people, neere unto the place which is called goate
marshe, as we have mentioned more at large in his life. The
2. occasion and beginning of this warre (according to the opinion of
most writers) was, that Camillus being chosen Dictator the third time,
& knowing that the Trib. militares with their army were straightly
besieged by the LATINES, and VOLSCES: he was inforced to arme all the
old men, who for very age were priviledged from further service in
warres. And having fetched a great compasse about mount Martian,
bicause he would not be seene of his enemies, he came to lodge his
campe behind them, where he raised fiers, to make the ROMAINES knowe
that were besieged, how he was come: which as sone as they perceived,
they tooke to them corage again, and determined to fight. But the
LATINES and VOLSCES kept within their campe, & dyd entrenche and
fortifie them selves with a wall of wodd, which they layed a crosse,
bicause they saw they were beset both before and behind: and
determined to tary the releefe of a new supply, as well of their owne,
as of some further ayde besides from the THVSCANS, which thing
Camillus perceaving, and fearing least they should serve him, as he
had already handled them by compassing of him again behind: he thought
it necessary to prevent this. So considering the enclosure and
fortification of their campe was all of wodde, & that every morning
commonly, there came a great winde from the side of the mountaines, he
made provision of a number of fire brandes. And leading out his armie
into the fields by breake of day, he appointed one parte of them to
geve charge upon the enemies on the one side, with great noyse and
showting: and he with the other parte determined to rayse fier on the
contrary side, from whence the winde should come, looking for
oportunitic to doe the same. When he sawe the sunne up, and the winde
beginning to whistle, blowing a good gale from the side of the hilles,
and that the skirmishe was begonne on the other side: then he gave a
signall unto the companie he led with him, to set upon the enemies,
and made them throwe into the inclosure of their campe, divers potts
and dartes with fire, so that the flame finding matter to catche holde
of, in this enclosure of wodde, & trees layed overthwart, dyd raise
straight an exceding great flame in the ayer, and still got waye
inwards into the LATINES campe. Whereupon the LATINES heing unprovided
of present remedy to quenche CAMILLVS the flame, and seeing their
campe a fyre all about their eares: they gathered them selves together
at the first in a very small roome. Nevertheles, they were inforced in
the ende to get them into the field, and there they founde their
enemies ready armed, and in battell raye. So as fewe of those escaped
that came into the field, and their fellowes that remained within
their campe, were burnt to death with fyer, untill the ROMAINES them
selves came to quench it for greedines of their spoyle and
goodes. When all this was done, Camillus left his sonne in the campe,
to keepe the prisoners and spoyles: and he him self, with the rest of
the armie, went to invade his enemies contrie, where he tooke the
cittie of AEQVES. Then after he had overcome the VOLSCES, he led his
army presently from thence unto the cittie of SUTRIVM. For he had not
yet harde of their misfortune. Therefore he hasted him self to ayde
them, bicause he thought they were yet besieged by the THVSCANS. But
suche was their harde fortune, that they had already yelded up their
cittie by composition, and saved no parte of their goodes, but the
very clothes they had on their backs. So being turned out ofall they
had, they met Camillus by the waye as they were wandring abroad,
lamenting their miserie, with their wives & litle young children whose
miserie went to the very harte of Camillus, when he beheld their
lamentable state. Furthermore, when he sawe the ROMAINES weepe for
pittie also, to see the mone that these unfortunate people made unto
him, and that it greved them hartely to beholde their great
mischaunce: he determined with him self not to deferre revenge, but
presently to goe the selfe same daye before the cittie of SVTRIVM,
imagining that he should finde the THVSCANS out of order, without
keeping watch, and attending nothing but making good cheere, bicause
they had newly taken a wealthy riche cittie, where they had left never
an enemy in the same to hurte them, neither feared any abroad to come
neere to assaulte them. And in deede it fell out rightly as he
gessed. For he had not only passed through the territories of the
cittie, without any intelligence geven to the enemies within the same:
but he was come to the very gates, and had taken the walles, before
they hard any thing of his by reason they neither kept watch nor
warde, but were dispersed abroade in the cittie, in every house,
eating & drincking droncke together. Insomuch as when they knew their
enemies were already within the cittie, they were so full fraight with
meate and wine, that the most of their wittes served them not so much
as to flye, but taried untill they were slaine or taken, like beastes
in the houses. Thus was the cittie of SVTRIVM twise taken in one
daye. And it chaunced that those which had wonne it, lost it: and
those which had lost it, recovered it againe by Camillus meanes. Who
deserved both the honour and entrie of triumphe into ROME: the which
wanne him no lesse good will and glorie, then the two first before had
done prayse, and gotten fame. For even his greatest enemies that most
spighted and envied his former noble actes, ascribing them rather to
fortune that favored him, then to his valliantnes or worthines: were
forced nowe by this deede of his to confesse, that his wisedome and
valliantnes deserved prayse and commendation to the skyes. Camillus of
all his enemies had one most bitter to him, which was Marcus Manlius,
that was the first man that gave the GAVLES the repulse that night
they had entered the walles of the Capitoll, and had thought to have
taken it: whereupon they gave him the surname of Capitolinus. He
aspiring to be the chief of the cittie, & finding no direct waye to
exceede the glory of Camillus, tooke the broade highe waye of them
that practise tyrannie+. For he beganne to flatter the common people,
and specially those that were indebted: he tooke upon him to defende
their causes, & CAMILLVS pleaded their case at the barre against their
creditours. Sometimes he tooke the debters out of the creditours
handes and caried them awaye by force, that for lacke of abilitie to
paye, were by rigour of the lawe condemned to be bonde slaves. But by
this practise, in shorte time he gotte him a marvelous number of such
needie followers, and poore men, that the noble men and honest
cittizens were affrayed of the insolent partes they played, & of the
continual troubles and tumultes they daylie stirred up in the market
place. Therefore suspecting the worst in this case, they dyd choose
Quintus Capitolinus Dictator: who caused the sayed Manlius immediately
to be apprehended, and committed him to prison. Whereupon the people
beganne to chaunge their apparell: which they were never wont to doe,
but in great and common calamities. But the Senate fearing least some
commotion would ryse hereupon, they dyd set him at libertie againe. He
being thus out of prison, was no whit the better, nor wiser thereby,
but dyd still stirre up the commons, more boldely and seditiously,
then before. Then was Camillus chosen againe Tribunus military, and
Manlius was accused in his time of office. But when this matter came
to pleading, the sight of the Capitoll troubled his accusers much. For
the very place it selfe where Manlius had repulsed the GAVLES by
night, and defended the Capitoll, was easely seene from the market
place, where the matter was a hearing: & he him selfe pointing with
his hande, shewed the place unto the goddes, and weeping tenderly he
layed before them the remembraunce of the hazarde of his life, in
fighting for their safety. This dyd move the judges hartes to pittie,
so as they knew not what to doe, but many times they dyd put over the
hearing of his case unto another daye, and neither would they geve
judgement, knowing he was convicted by manifest proofes: neither could
they use the severitie of the lawe upon him, bicause the place of his
so notable good service was ever still before their eyes. Therefore
Camillus finding the cause of delaye of justice, dyd make the place of
judgement to be removed without the cittie, into a place called the
wodde Petelian, from whence they could not see the Capitoll. And there
the accusers gave apparent evidence against him: & the judges
considering all his wicked practises, conceaved a just cause to
punishe him, as he had deserved. So they gave sentence of death
against him: that he should be caried to the mount Capitoll, and there
to be throwen downe hedlonge the rockes thereof. Thus, one, and the
selfe place was a memory of his notable good service, & also a
memoriall of his miserable and unfortunate end. Besides all this, they
rased his house, and built in the same place a temple to the goddesse
they call Moneta: {Keats+} & made a lawe also, that no Patrician from
thenceforth should dwell any more in the mount Capitoll. Camillus
after this, being called againe to take the office of Tribunus
militaris the sixt time: he sought to excuse him selfe aswell for that
he sawe he was well stepte in yeres, as also for that he feared
fortunes spight, or some mishappe, after he had obteined such glorie
for his noble actes and service. Howbeit the most apparent cause of
his excuse, was his sickenes, which troubled him much at that
time. But the people would allowe no excuse by any meanes, but cried
out, they dyd not desire he should fight a foote nor a horse backe,
but that he should only geve counsaill, and commaunde: and therefore
they compelled him to take the charge, and to leade the armie with one
of his companions named Lucius Furius, against their enemies the
PRAENESTINES, & the VOLSCES, who joyning together, dyd invade the
confines of the ROMAINES friendes. So he led his army out immediately
to the field, and camped as neere the enemy as he could: being minded
for his parte to drawe the warres out in length, that he might fight
CAMILLVS afterwards (if neede required) when he had recovered
strength. But Furius contrarilie coveting glorie, was whottely bent to
hazarde the battell, whatsoever perill came of it: & to this ende he
sturred up, & incoraged the captaines of everie private
bande. Wherfore Camillus fearing least they should thinke, for ill
will he bare the young men, that he went about to hinder and take
awaye the meancs to winne their honour, {war+} and to doe some noble
acte: suffered Furius against his will to put his men in order of
battell, and he in the meane season by reason of his sickness remained
with a fewe about him in the campe. So went Lucius upon a head to
present battell to the enemie, and so was he as headilie afso
overthrowen. But Camillus hearing the ROMAINES were overthrowen: sicke
as he was upon his bedde, got up, and taking his householde servantes
with him, he went in haste to the gates of the campe, and passed
through those that fled, untill he came to mete with the enemies that
had them in chase. The ROMAINES seeing this that were already entred
into the campe, they followed him at the heeles forthwith: & those
that fled also without, when they sawe him, they gathered together,
and put them selves againe in arraye before him, and persuaded one
another not to forsake their captaine. So their enemies hereupon
stayed their chasing, & would pursue no further that daye. But the
next morning, Camillus leading his armie into the fielde, gave them
battell, and wanne the field of them by plaine force: and following
the victorie harde, he entred amongest them that fled into their campe
pelmel, or hand overheade, and slue the most parte of them even
there. After this yictorie, he was advertised howe the THVSCANS had
taken the cittie of SVTRIVM, and had put to the sworde all the
inhabitants of the same, which were the ROMAINES cittizens. Whereupon
he sent to ROME the greatest parte of his army, and keeping with Mm
the lightest and lustiest men, went and gave assaulte unto the
THVSCANS that nowe were harbored in the cittie of SVTRIVM. Which when
he had wonne againe, he slue parte of them, & the other saved them
selves by flight. After this, he returned to ROME with an exceeding
spoyle, confirming by experience, the wisedome of the ROMAINES, who
dyd not feare the age nor sicknes of a good captaine that was expert
and valliant: but had chosen him against his will, though he was both
olde and sicke, and preferred him farre before the younger and lustier
that made sute to have the charge. Newes being brought unto the
Senate, that the THVSCVLANIANS were revolted, they sent Camillus
thither againe, willing him of five other companions to take out one
he liked best, every of the which desired to be chosen, and made their
sute unto him for the same. But he refusing all other, dyd chose
againe Lucius Furius beyounde all expectation of men, seeing not long
before he needes would against his will hazarde battell, in which he
was overthrowen. Howbeit Camillus, having a desire (as I thincke) to
hyde his faulte and shame he had receaved: dyd of curtesie+ preferre
him before all other. Nowe the THVSCVLANIANS hearing of Camillus
comming against them, subtilly sought to culler the faulte they had
already committed. Wherefore they put out a great number of people
into the fields, some to plowe, other to keepe the beastes, as if they
had bene in best peace: and dyd set the gates of the cittie wide open,
sent their children openly to schoole, their artificers wrought their
occupation in their shoppes, the men of haviour & honest cittizens
walked in the market place in their long gownes, & the officers &
governours of the cittie went up and downe to every house, commaunding
them to prepare lodgings for the ROMAINES, as if they had stoode in no
feare at all, and as though they had committed no faulte. Howbeit all
these fine fetches could not make Ca- CAMILLVS millus beleeve, but
that they had an intent to rebell against the ROM@INES: yet they made
Camillus pittie them, seeing they repented them of that they had
determined to doe. So he commaunded them to goe to ROME to the Senate,
to crave pardone of their faulte: and he him selfe dyd helpe them, not
only to purge their cittie of any intent of rebellion, but also to get
them the priviledge and freedome of ROME. And these be the chiefest
acts Camillus dyd in the sixt time of his tribuneshippe. After this,
one Licinius Stolo moved great sedition in the cittie, betwene the
common people, and the Senate. For he would in any case that of the
two Consuls, which were chosen yerely, the one of them should be a
commoner, and not that both of them should be of the auncient noble
families, called Patricians. The Tribunes of the people were chosen,
but the election of the Consuls, the people stayed: so that the common
wealth went to decaye, and declined to greater troubles, then ever it
dyd before, for lacke of government. But to suppresse this, the Senate
created Camillus the fourth time Dictator: but this was sore against
his will, bicause it misliked the people muche. Furthermore, he would
not complaine of the people, for that they having served under him in
many warres and battells, might boldely, and truely saye unto him:
that he had done more notable acts by them in the warres, then he had
done by the Patricians in peace. Yet was he created Dictator in
despight, to rule the people, and of envie in the noble men towards
them. Thus necessitie dyd urge him, either by force to suppresse the
people, if he were the stronger in this dissention: or els that he him
self should be suppressed, if he became the weaker. Camillus
notwithstanding, preparing to prevent this mischief, & knowing the
daye the Tribunes had determined, to preferre the passing of their
lawe by voyces of the people: he gave warning by proclamations set
upon postes, that the same very daye he would muster the people, and
all was but to drawe them from the market place into the field of
Mars, and dyd set great penalties upon those that should be lacking at
the musters, and would presume to disobey. The Tribunes of the people
on the contrarie parte, dyd withstande his threates, and sware they
would condemne Camillus selfe in fitie thousand Drachmas of silver, if
he dyd not let the people alone, but would goe about to disturbe them
for geving their voyces to such lawe, as they liked of. Camillus
perceaving this, and fearing to be condemned, and banished once
againe, which would fall out very ill for him, being nowe an olde man,
and one that had done so many great and notable actes, or els for that
he thought him selfe not strong enough to withstande the force of the
people: he kept his house that daye, fayning him selfe to be sicke,
and certaine other dayes following, and in the ende he gave up his
office. Thereupon the Senate chose in his place another Dictator, who
named the same Licinius Stolo general of the horse men, that was the
author and furtherer of all this sedition: and besides dyd suffer him
to preferre another lawe, and to passe it by voyces of the people,
that above all other lawes, dyd most trouble the Patricians. Which
lawe dyd forbid any cittizen of ROME, to have, or occupie above five
hundred jugera, which amount to 330. acres and a halfe,12. pole and
121. partes of a pole. Then was this Stolo alofte, & of great
estimation at that time: for that he had in despite of the Senate
established this law. Howbeit shortely after it was found out, that
him self had more number of acres then his owne lawe permitted. By
reason whereof, he receaved the juste punishment of his owne devised
forfaiture. Yet the most weightie matter of all this dissention that
beganne first, and most of all troubled the Senate, touching the
election of the Consuls, remained still undetermined. But while these
matters were thus in CAMILLVS talke, the ROMAINES had certen
intelligence, howe the GAVLES were departed once againe from the
Adriaticke sea, and were coming with a great power straight unto ROME:
upon reporte of which newes, the warres followed immediately. For the
GAVLES destroyed the champion country as they went: and the poore
country men that could not recover ROME, were scattered here and there
amongest the mountaines. The feare of this dyd somewhat appease the
dissention. The people then assembhng with the Senate, and the baser
sorte with the noble, dyd all with one voyce and assent chuse Camillus
Dictator the fifte time. He was nowe a very olde man, lacking litle of
foure score yeres: but nevertheless considering the necessitie and
present daunger, without framing any excuse, or starting as he had
before, he undertooke the charge. Nowe that he had taken it upon him,
he presently levied men, and prepared his army. And knowing very well
howe the fiercenes of these barbarous GAVLES consisted, in downe right
blowes with their swordes, with which they would strike of heades and
shoulders of men at a blowe, mangling them like bouchers, without any
cast or skyll of fight: he caused iron salletts, & morians to be made
for the most of his men, as smoothely wrought on the out side as could
be, that their swordes lighting on them, should either slyde of, or
breake. Moreover, he caused their sheldes to have barres made about
them of copper, bicause the wodde selfe was not able to abide their
blowes. Furthermore, he dyd teache his souldiers to cary long
javelines or punchion staves, wherewith they might wounde their
enemies lifting up their swordes to strike them. Nowe when the GAVLES
were come neere ROME, having pitched their campe upon the river of
Anian, and being full loden and stuffed with all kindes of spoyle and
booties: then Camillus brought his armie also into the fielde, and
went to lodge on a litle hill which was easie to get upon, where there
were many litle caves, so that the most of his army was all hidden and
covered, & those that were seene, seemed to be retired thither into
those highe places for an advantage, and of feare. Camillus to
increase this opinion more in his enemies, and to make them the
bolder: dyd suffer them to come and spoyle even to the foote of the
hill where he was lodged, and stirred not once out to trouble them,
but kept him selfe quiet in his campe and well fortified. Untill such
time as he spyed occasion of advantage, that the best parte of their
army were scattered here and there, a forraging all about the fieldes:
and those which remained in their campe, fell to eating and drincking,
as they used carelesly at all howres. Then Camillus sent very early
before daye, his lightest armed men, to vexe and trouble the barbarous
people in coming out of their campe, and to let them in any case from
putting their men in order of battell: and he at the breake of daye,
came downe into the plaine, and dyd set his other men being well
armed, in good arraye, which were a great number, and lustie fellowes,
and were not as the barbarous people thought, fewe, and
fearefall. This at the very first discoraged the hartes of the GAVLES
marvelously, bicause they thought them selves dishonored, that the
ROMAINES should charge upon them first. Afterwardes also Camillus
vantgarde dyd set upon the GAVLES, and that on a sodaine, before they
had leysure to put them selves in battell, or to order their troupes:
compelling them to fight without order, as they met out of order by
chaunce. In the ende also, Camillus came upon the neckes of them, with
all his whole force, & army together: against whom they ranne
notwithstanding, holding up their naked swordes alofte in their
handes. But the ROMAINES thrusting with their armed javelinges,
receaved their enemies blowes upon them, and thereby so rebated the
edges of their swordes CAMILLVS (their blades being very sharpe and
thinne grounde, and of so softe a temper) that they bowed againe, and
stoode crooked unreasonably: and furthermore, having persed their
shieldes through with their punching staves, the GAVLES armes were so
clogd and wearied with them, the ROMAINES plucking them backe to them
againe, that they threw away their swordes and shieldes, and flying
in, closed with the ROMAINES, and caught holde of their javelines,
thincking by plaine force to have wrested them out of their
handes. Howbeit they perceaving then the GAVLES were naked, fell
straight to their swordes: & so was the slaughter of their first
ranckes very great. The other fled scatteringly here and there, all
about the plaine: bicause Camillus had caused all the hilles and
mountaines about them to be occupied and possessed. Neither dyd they
retire towardes their campe, for that it was unfortified, and also
knewe well enough it would be easely taken. This battell (as they
saye) was thirteene yeres after their taking of ROME before. But after
that fielde, the ROMAINES corages were good enough against these
barbarous GAVLES, whom they stoode in feare of before: thincking the
first time they came, that they had not overcomed them by force, but
by reason of the plague that fell amongest them, or through some other
straunge chaunce. For they dyd so feare them at that time, that they
made a lawe, howe their priestes should be exempted from warres, so it
were not against the GAVLES. This overthrowe was the last marshall
acte Camillus dyd in the warres. For, the taking of the cittie of
VELITRES, was an accident depending upon this jorney: bicause they
yelded straight unto him, without striking any stroke. But the
seditiousnes of the people of ROME about government, and the choosing
of the yere Consuls, was the hardest matter he ever had in hande. For
they returning home to ROME stronge, and of greate power, by their
late ob- teined victorie: woulde in any case have one of the Consuls
to be chosen of a commoner, which was directy against their auncient
custome. But the Senate stowtely withstoode it, & would not suffer
Camillus to be put out of office: hoping the better by meanes of his
authoritie, which was greate then, that they should mainteine &
continue their auncient dignitie, & prerogative of their
nobilitie. But as Camillus was set in his chayer in the market place,
where he hearde & dispatched causes: there came a sergeante to him,
sent from the Tribunes of the people, who commaunded him to followe
him, and there withall layed violent handes upon him, as he woulde
have caried him awaye by force. This made suche a terrible tumulte and
uprore, that the like was never seene before in the market place. For
Camillus friendes drave the sergeaunte backe behinde the chayer. The
common people cried out againe to the sergeant from beneath, pull him
out of his chayer. This so amazed Camillus, that he knew not well what
to saye to the matter. Notwithstanding, he would not resigne up his
office, but taking those Senatours he had about him, he went unto the
place where the Senate was wont to be kept. And there, before he would
goe into it, he returned backe againe unto the Capitoll, & made his
prayer unto the goddes, that it would please them to bring his
troubles againe to a quiet, and so made a solemne vowe and promise (if
these tumultes and troubles might be pacified) that he woulde builde a
temple of Concorde. When this matter came to debating before the
Senate, there fell great contention and diversitie of opinions among
them: yet in the ende, the easiest waye dyd carie it, and that was to
graunt the common peoples desire, that a commoner should be chosen
Consul with a noble man. The Dictator having openly published to the
people the Senates decree, confirming their desire: the common people
were so joyfull, that at that presente they let fall all their malice
against the Nobilitie and Senate, & brought Camillus home to his
house, with greate showtes of joye, and clapping of handes. The next
morning all the people being assembled together in the market place,
it was there decreed: that the temple of concorde should be built at
the common wealthes charge (according to the vowe Camillus had made)
in such a place, as it might be seene from the market place selfe,
where all the assemblies for matters of counsell were naade. And
further, it was ordered that one daye more should be added to the
feastes of the LATINES: and that from thenceforth they should
solemnise foure fesdvall dayes, and should presently make generall
sacrifices unto the goddes, in everie temple of the cittie, to geve
them thanckes: and in token of joye, they should all weare garlands
upon their heades for this reconciliation. So Camillus proceeding to
election, there were chosen two Consuls, Marcus AEmilius of the noble
Patricians, and Lucius Sextus of the Plebeians or commoners. And this
was the laste acte that ever Camillus dyd. For, the next yere after,
the plague+ was in ROME, and tooke awoye an infinite number of people
that dyed, besides many magistrates and officers of the cittie that
departed: among whom, Camillus also left his life. Who notwithstanding
he had lived a long time, and had ended a reasonable course of life:
yet he was as ready to dye, and as paciently tooke his death+, as any
man living could have done. Moreover, the ROMAINES made more mone and
lamentation for his deathe alone, then for all the rest the plague had
already consumed. The ende of Furius Camillus life.

THE END OF THE FIRST VOLUME
