Montaigne's Essays Book I

Source: Michel Montaigne. The Essays of Michael Lord of Montaigne,
1580, 1597. Translated by John Florio, 1603. World's Classics
edition. 3 volumes, Vol. 1. London: Frowde, 1904.Before using any
portion of this text in any theme, essay, research paper, thesis, or
dissertation, please read the disclaimer.  Transcription conventions:
Volume I page numbers in angle brackets refer to the edition cited as
the source. Words or phrases singled out for indexing are marked by
plus signs. In the index, numbers in parentheses indicate how many
times the item appears. A slash followed by a small letter or a number
indicates a footnote at the bottom of the page. Only notes of
historical, philosophical, or literary interest to a general reader
have been included. I have allowed Greek passages to stand as the
scanner read them, in unintelligible strings of characters.

Archaic spellings: If you are puzzled by the spelling of a word, try
these remedies.

Replace u with v (giue = give)

Replace i with j (obiect = object)

Replace y with i (Englyshe = English)

Remove the final e (Englyshe = English)

THE AUTHOR TO THE READER+

READER, loe here a well-meaning Booke.  It doth at the first entrance
forewarne thee, that in contriving the same I have proposed unto my
selfe no other than a familiar and private end: I have no respect or
consideration at all, either to thy service, or to my glory: my forces
are not capable of any such desseigne.  I have vowed the same to the
particular commodity of my kinsfolk and friends: to the end, that
losing me (which they are likely to do ere long), they may therein
find some lineaments of my conditions and humours, and by that meanes
reserve more whole, and more lively foster the knowledge and
acquaintance they have had of me. Had my intention beene to forestal
and purchase the world's opinion and favour, I would surely have
adorned myselfe more quaintly, or kept a more grave and solemne march.
I desire therein to be delineated in mine own genuine, simple and
ordinarie fashion, without contention, art or study; {PlainDealer+}
for it is myselfe I pourtray.  My imperfections shall thus be read to
the life, and my naturall forme discerned, so farre-forth as publike
reverence hath permitted me.  For if my fortune had beene to have
lived among those nations which yet are said to live under the sweet
liberty of Nature's first and uncorrupted lawes, {Gonzalo+} I assure
thee, I would most willingly have pourtrayed myselfe fully and naked.
Thus, gentle Reader, myselfe am the groundworke of my booke: it is
then no reason thou shouldest employ thy time about so frivolous and
vaine a subject.

Therefore farewell,

From MONTAIGNE,

The First of March, 1580.

THE ESSAYES OF MICHAEL LORD OF MONTAIGNE THE FIRST BOOKE

CHAPTER 1.I+ BY DIVERS MEANES MEN COME UNTO A LIKE END

THE most usuall way to appease those minds we have offended (when
revenge lies in their hands, and that we stand at their mercy) is, by
submission to move them to commiseration and pitty: Neverthelesse,
courage, constancie, and resolution (meanes altogether opposite) have
sometimes wrought the same effect.  Edward the black Prince of Wales
(who so long governed our Country of Guienne, a man whose conditions
and fortune were accompanied with many notable parts of worth and
magnanimitie) having beene grievously offended by the Limosins, though
he by maine force tooke and entered their Citie, could by no meanes be
appeased, nor by the wailefull out-cries ofall sorts of people (as of
men, women, and children) be moved to any pittty, they prostrating
themselves to the common slaughter, crying for mercy, and humbly
submitting themselves at his feet, until such time as in triumphant
manner passing thorow their Citie, he perceived three French
Gentlemen, who alone, with an incredible and undaunted boldnesse
gainstood the enraged violence, and made head against the furie of his
victorious armie.  The consideration and respect of so notable a
vertue, did first abate the dint of his wrath, and from those three
began to relent, and shew mercy to all the other inhabitants of the
said towne.  Scanderbeg, Prince of Epirus, following one of his
souldiers, with purpose to kill him, who by all means of humilitie,
and submisse entreatie, had first offered to pacifie him, in such an
unavoidable extremitie, resolved at last, resolutely to encounter him
with his sword in his hand.  This resolution did immediately stay his
Captains fury, who seeing him undertake so honourable an attempt, not
only forgave, but received him into grace and favour.  This example
may haply, of such as have not knowne the prodigious force and
matchless valour of the said Prince, admit another interpretation.
The Emperor Conradus, third of that name, having besieged Guelphe,
Duke of Bavaria, what vile or base satisfacfaction soever was offered
him, would yeeld to no other milder conditions, but only to suffer
such Gentlewomen as were with the Duke in the Citie (their honours
safe) to issue out of the Towne afoot, with such things as they could
carry about them.  They with an unrelenting courage advised and
resolved themselves (neglecting all other riches or jewels) to carry
their husbands, their children, and the Duke himselfe, on their backs:
the Emperour perceiving the quaintnesse of their device, tooke so
great pleasure at it, that hee wept for joy, and forthwith converted
that former inexorable rage, and mortall hatred he bare the Duke, into
so milde a relenting and gentle kindnesse, that thence forward he
entreated both him and his with all favour and courtesie.  Either of
these wayes might easily perswade mee: for I am much inclined to
mercie, and affected to mildnesse.  So it is, that in mine opinion, I
should more naturally stoope unto compassion, than bend to estimation.
Yet is pitty held a vicious passion among the Stoicks+.  They would
have us aid the afflicted, but not to faint and co-suffer with them.
These examples seeme fittest for mee, forsomuch as these minds are
seene to be assaulted and environed by these two meanes, in
undauntedly suffering the one, and stooping under the other.  It may
peradventure be said, that to yeeld ones heart unto commiseration, is
an effect of facility, tendernesse, and meeknesse: whence it
proceedetrh, that the weakest natures, as of women, children, and the
vulgar sort are more subject unto it.  But (having contemned teares
and wailings) to yeeld unto the onely reverence of the sacred Image of
vertue, is the effect of a couagious and imployable mind, holding a
masculine and contant vigour, in honour and
affection. Notwithstanding, amazement and admiration may in lesse
generous minds worke the like effect.  Witnesse the Thebanes, who
having accused and indited their Captaines, as of a capitall crime,
forsomuch as they had continued their charge beyond the time
prescribed them, absolved and quit Pelopidas of all punishment,
because he submissively yeelded under the burden of such objections,
and to save himselfe, imployed no other meanes, but suing-requests,
and demisse entreaties; where on the contrary, Epaminondas boldly
relating the exploits atchieved by him, and with a fierce and arrogant
manner upbraiding the people with them, had not the heart so much as
to take their lots into his hands, but went his way, and was freely
absolved; the assembly much commending the stoutnesse of his courage.
Dionysius the elder, after extreme difficulties, having taken the
Citie of Reggio, and in it the Captaine Phyton (a worthy honest man),
who had so obstinately defended the same, would needs shew a tragicall
example of revenge.  First, he told him, how the day before, he had
caused his sonne and all his kinsfolkes to be drowned. To whom Phyton,
stoutly out-staring him, answered nothing, but that they were more
happy than himselfe by the space of one day.  Afterward he caused him
to he stripped, and by his executioners to be taken and dragged thorow
the Citie most ignominiously, whipping him, charging him besides with
contumelious speeches.  All which not- withstanding, as one no whit
dismayed, he ever shawed a constant and resolute heart; and with a
cheerefull and bold countenance went on still, loudly recounting the
honourable and glorious cause of his death, which was, that he would
never consent to yeeld his Country into the hands of a cruell tyrant,
menacing him with an imminent punishment of the Gods. Dionysius
plainly reading in his Souldiers lookes, that in lieu of animating
them with braving his conquered enemie, they in contempt of him, and
scorn of his triumph, seemed by the astonishment of so rare a vertue,
to be moved with compassion, and inclined to mutinie, yea, and to free
Phyton from out the hands of his Sergeants, or Guard, caused his
torture to cease, and secretly sent him to be drowned in the sea.
Surely, man is a wonderful, vaine, divers, and wavering subject: it is
very hard to ground any directly-constant and uniforme judgement upon
him.  Behold Pompey, who freely pardoned all the Citie of the
Mamertines (against which he was grievously enraged) for the love of
the magnanimitie, and consideration of the exceeding vertue of Zeno,
one of their fellow-citizens, who tooke the publike fault wholly upon
himselfe, and desired no other favour, but alone to beare the
punishment thereof; whereas Syllaes host having used the like vertue
in the Citie of Perugia, obtained nothing, neither for himself, nor
for others.  And directly against my first example, the hardiest
amongst men, and so gracious to the vanquished, Alexander the great,
after many strange difficulties, forcing the Citie of Gaza, encountred
by chance with Betis, that commanded therein, of whose valour (during
the siege) he had felt wonderfull and strange exploits, being then
alone, forsaken of all his followers, his armes all-broken,
all-besmeared with bloud and wounds, fighting amongst a number of
Macedonians, who pell-mell laid still upon him; provoked by so deare a
victorie (for among other mishaps he had newly received two hurts in
his body) said this unto him; 'Betis, thou shalt not die as thou
wouldest: for make account thou must indure all the torments may
possibly bee devised or inflicted upon a caitife wretch, as thou art.'
But he, for all his enemies threats, without speaking one word,
returned only an assured, sterne, and disdainefull countenance upon
him; which silent obstinacie Alexander noting, said thus unto
himselfe: What? would hee not bend his knee? could he not utter one
suppliant voyce?  I will assuredly vanquish his shence, and if I
cannot wrest a word from him, I will at least make him to sob or
groane.' And converting his anger into rage, commanded his heeles to
bee through-pierced, and so all alive with a cord through them, to be
torne, mangled, and dismembered at a carts-taile.  May it be, the
force of his courage, was so naturall and peculiar unto him, that
because he would no-whit admire him, he respected him the lesse? or
deemed he it so proper unto himselfe, that in his height, he could not
without the spigot of envious passion, endure to see it in an other?
or was the naturall violence of his rage incapable of any opposition?
surely, had it received any restraint, it may be supposed, that in the
ransacking and desolation of the Citie of Thebes, it should have felt
the same; in seeing so many Worthies lost, and valiant men put to the
sword, as having no meanes of publike defence; for above six thousand
were slaine and massacred, of which not one was seene, either to run
away, or beg for grace.  But on the contrary, some here and there
seeking to affront, and endeavouring to check their victorious
enemies, urging and provoking them to force them die an honourable
death. Not one was seene to yeeld, and that to his last gaspe did not
attempt to revenge himselfe, and with all weapons of dispaire, with
the death of some enemie, comfort and sweeten his owne miserie.  Yet
could not the affliction of their vertue find any ruth or pitie, nor
might one day suffice to glut or asswage his revengefull wrath.  This
butcherous slaughter continued unto the last drop of any remaining
bloud; where none were spared but the unarmed and naked, the aged and
unpotent, the women and children; that so from amongst them, they
might get thirtie thousand slaves.

CHAPTER 1.II+ OF SADNESSE OR SORROWE

No man is more free from this passion than I, for I neither love nor
regard it: albeit the world hath undertaken, as it were upon covenant,
to grace it with a particular favour.  Therewith they adorne age,
vertue, and conscience.  Oh foolish and base ornament!  The Italians
have more properly with it's name entitled malignitie: for, it is a
qualitie ever hurtfull, ever sottish; and as ever base and coward, the
Stoikes inhibit their Elders and Sages to be therewith tainted, or
have any feeling of it.  But the Storie saith; that Psamneticus king
of AEgypt, having been defeated and taken by Cambises king of Persia,
seeing his owne daughter passe before him in base and vile aray, being
sent to draw water from a well, his friends weeping and wailing about
him (he with his eves fixed on the ground, could not be moved to utter
one word), and shortly after beholding his sonne led to execution,
held still the same undaunted countenance: but perceiving a familiar
friend of his haled amongst the captives, he began to beat his head,
and burst forth into extreame sorrow.  This might well be compared to
that which one of our Princes was lately seene to doe, who being at
Trent, and receiving newes of his elder brothers death; but such a
brother as on him lay all the burthen and honour of his house; and
shortly after tidings of his younger brothers decease, who was his
second hope; and having with an unmatched countenance and exemplar
constancie endureth these two affronts; it fortuned not long after,
that one of his servants dying, he by this latter accident suffered
himselfe to be so far transported, that quitting and forgetting his
former resolution, he so abandoned himselfe to all manner of sorrow
and griefe, that some argued, only this last mischance had toucht him
to the quicke: but verily the reason was that being otherwise full,
and over-plunged in sorrow, the least surcharge brake the bounds and
barres of patience.  The light might (I say) be, judged of our storie,
were it not it followeth, that Cambises enquirmg of Psamneticus, why
he was nothing distempered at the misfortune of his sonne and
daughter, he did so impatiently beare the disaster of his friend: 'It
is,' answered he, 'because this last displeasure may be manifested by
weeping whereas the two former exceed by much, all meanes and compass
to bee expressed by teares.' The invention of that ancient Painter
might happily fit this purpose, who in the sacrifice of Iphigenia,
being to represent the griefe of the by- standers, according to the
qualitie and interest each one bare for the death of so faire, so
young and innocent a Lady, having ransacked the utmost skill and
effects of his art, when he came to the Virgins father, as if no
countenance were able to represent that degree of sorrow, he drew him
with a vaile over his face.  And that is the reason why our Poets
faine miserable Niobe, who first having lost seven sonnes and
immediately as many daughters, as one over-burthened with their
losses, to have been transformed into a stone; Diriguisse malis:/1 And
grew as hard as stone, But miserie and moane.

Thereby to expresse this mournfull shent stupiditie, which so doth
pierce us, when accidents surpassing our strength orewhelme us.
Verily the violence of a griefe, being extreme; must needs astonie the
mind, and hinder the liberty of her actions.  As it hapneth at the
sudden alarum of some bad tidings, when we shall feele

----- 1 Ovid.  Met 1. vi. 303.

our selves surprised, benummed, and as it were deprived of all motion,
so that the soule bursting afterward forth into teares and complaints,
seemeth at more ease and libertie to loose, to cleare and dilate it
selfe.  Et via vix tandem voci laxata dolore est:/1 And scarce at last
for speech By griefe was made a breach.

In the warres which king Ferdinando made against the widow of John
king of Hungaria, about Buda; a man at armes was particularly noted of
all men, for much as in a certaine skirmish be had shewed exceeding
prowesse of his body, and though unknowne, being slaine, was highly
commended and much bemoaned of all; but yet of none so greatly as of a
Germane lord, called Raisciac, as he that was amased at so rare
vertue: his body being recovered and had off, this Lord, led by a
common curiositie, drew neere unto it, to see who it might be, and
having caused him to be disarmed, perceived him to be his own sonne;
which knowne, did greatly augment the compassion of all the camp: he
only without framing word, or closing his eyes, but earnestly viewing
the dead body of his sonne, stood still up upright, till the
vehemencie of his sad sorrow, having suppressed and choaked his vitall
spirits, fell'd him starke dead to the ground. {Lear+} Chi puo dir
com' egli arde, e in picciol fuoco:/2 He that can say how he doth
frie, ln pettie-gentle flames doth lie,

say those Lovers that would lively represent an intolerable passion.
  
 
             misere quod omne

  Eripit sensus mihi; Nam simul t


  Lesbia aspexi, nihil est super mi

  Quod loquar amen

  Lingua torpet, tenuis sub artu

  Flamma dimanant, sonitu suopt

  Tinniunt aures, gemina teguntur

  Lumina nocte./3 miserably from me


----- 1 VIRG.  Aen. 1. xi. 151. 2 PET. p. 1.  Son. 140.3 CATUL.
Epig. xlviii. 5.

  This bereaves all sense: for I can no soone

  Eie thee my sweet heart, but I wot not one word to speak amazed

  Tongue-tide as in a trance, while a sprightly thin flam

       Flowes in all my joynts with a selfe-resounding

  Both my ears tingle, with a night redoubled

  Both mine eies are veild.

     Nor is it in the liveliest, and most ardent heat of the fit, that
wee are able to display our plaints and perswasions, the soule being
then aggravated with heavie thoughts, and the body suppressed and
languishing for love.  And thence is sometimes engendered that casuall
faintnes, which so unseasonably surpriseth passionate Lovers, and that
childnesse, which by the Curae leves loquuntur, ingentes stapent./1
Light cares can freely speake Great cares heart rather breake.

The surprize of an unexpected pleasure astonieth us alike.

  Vt me conspexit venientem, et Troja circu

  Arma amins vidit, maqnis exterrita monstris

  Diriguit visu in medi, calor ossa reliquit

  Labitur, et longo vix tandem tempore fatur./2


  When she beheld me come, and round abou

  Senselesse saw Trojan armes, she stood afrai

  Stone-still at so strange sights: life heat flew out

  She faints: at last, with long pause thus she said.


Besides the Romane Ladie, that die for joy to see her sonne returne
alive from the battell of Cannae, Sophocles and Dionysius the Tyrant,
who deceased through overgladnes: and Talva, who died in Corsica,
reading the newes of the honours the Roman Senate had conferred him:
It is reported that in our age, Pope Leo the tenth having received
advertisement of the taking of the Citie of Millane, which be had so
exceedingly desired, entred into such excesse of joy, that he fell

----- 1 SEN.  Hip.  Act. ii.  Scena 2. 2 VIRG.  Aenead. 1. iii. 306.

into an ague whereof he shortly died.  And for a more authenticall
testimonie of humane imbecilitie, it is noted by our Ancients that
Diodorus the Logician, being surprised with an extreme passion or
apprehension of shame, fell down starke dead, because neither in his
Schoole, nor in publique, he had beene able to resolve an argument
prepounded unto him.  I am little subject to these violent passions.
I have naturally a hard apprehension, which by discourse I daily
harden more and more.

CHAPTER 1.III+ OUR AFFECTIONS ARE TRANSPORTED BEYOND OUR SELVES

THOSE which still accuse men for ever gaping after future things, and
go about to teach us, to take hold of present fortunes+, and settle
our selves upon them, 0as having no hold of that which is to come; yea
much lesse than we have of that which is already past, touch and are
ever harping upon the commonest humane error, if they dare call that
an error, to which Nature her selfe, for the service of the
continuation of her worke, doth address us, imprinting (as it doth
many others) this false imagination in us, as more jealous of our
actions, than of our knowledge.  We are never in our selves, but
beyond.  Feare, desire, and hope, draw us ever towards that which is
to come, and remove our sense and consideration from that which is, to
amuse us on that which shall be, yea when we shall be no
more. Calamitosus est animus futuri anxius./1 'A minde in suspense
what is to come, is in a pittifull case.' This noble precept is often
alleaghed in Plato, 'Follow thy businesse and know thy selfe;' Each of
these two members, doth generally imply all our duty; and likewise
enfolds his companion. He that should doe his businesse might perceive
that his first lesson is, to know what he is, and what is convenient
for him.  And he that knoweth himselfe, takes no more anothers matters
for his owne, but above all other things, loveth and correcteth
himselfe, rejecteth superfluous occupations, idle imaginations, and
unprofitable propositions.

----- SEN.  Epis. 98

As if you grant follie what it desireth, it will no-whit be satisfied;
so is wisdome content with that which is present, and never displeased
with it selfe.  Epicurus doth dispense with his age touching the
foresight and care of what shall insue.  Amongst the lawes that regard
the deceased, that which ties the actions of Princes to be examined
when they are dead, seemes to me verie solid.  They are companions, if
not masters of the lawes: That which justice could not worke on their
heads, it is reason it effect upon their reputation+, and goods of
their successors: things wee many times preferre before our lives.  It
is a custome brings many singular commodities unto nations that
observe it, and to be desired of all good Princes: who have cause to
complaine that the memorie of the wicked is used as theirs. Wee owe a
like obedience and subjection to all Kings; for it respects their
office: but estimation and affection, we owe it only to their vertue.
If they be unworthy, wee are to endure them patiently, to conceale
their vices, and to aid their indifferent actions with our
commendations, as long as their authoritie hath need of our
assistance,{Kent+} and that ought to be ascribed unto politike order.
But our commerce with them being ended, there is no reason we should
refuse the unfolding of our felt wrongs unto justice and our libertie.
And specially to refuse good subjects, the glory to have reverently
and faithfully served a master, {Kent+} whose imperfections were so
well knowne unto them: exempting posteritie from so profitable an
example.  And such as for the respect of some private benefit or
interest, doe wickedly embrace the memorie of an unworthy Prince, doe
particular justice at the cbarge of publike justice.  Titus Livius
speaketh truly, where he saith, that the speech of men brought up
under a royaltie is ever full of vaine ostentations, and false
witness; everyman indiferently extolling the King, to the furthest
straine of valour and soveraigne greatnesse. The magnanimitie of those
two Souldiers may be reproved, one of which being demanded of Nero,
why he hated him, answered him to his teeth; I loved thee whilest thou
wast worthy of love, but Since thou becamest a parricide, a
fire-brand, a Juglar, a Player, and a Coach-man, I hate thee, as thou
deservest. {Kent+} The other being asked, wherefore he sought to kill
him, answered, Because I finde no other course to hinder thy uncessant
outrages and impious deeds.  But can any man, that hath his senses
about him, justly prove the publike and generall testimonies that
since his death have beene given, and so shall be for ever, both
against him and all such like reprobates, of his tyrannicall and
wicked demeanours?  I am sorrie that in so sacred a policie as the
Lacedemonian was, so fained and fond a ceremonie at the death of their
Kings was ever devised and brought in use.  All their confederates and
neighbours, all the slave-Helotes, men and women pell- mell, for a
testimonie of their grief and sorrow, did mangle and gash their
foreheads, and in their out-cries and lamentations exclaimed, that
their deceased King, howsoever he had lived, was and had beene the
best Prince that ever they had, ascribing in order the commendations
due unto desert, and to the last and latter ranke, what belongs unto
the first merit.  Aristotle that hath an oare in every water, and
medleth with all things, makes a question about Solons speech, who
saith, that no man can truly be counted happy before his death,
Whether he that lived and died according to his wish, may be named
happy, whether his renowne be good or ill, and whether his posteritie
be miserable or no.  Whilest wee stirre and remove, wee transport our
selves by preoccupation wheresoever we list: but no sooner are wee out
of being, but wee have no conununication at all with that which
is. And it were better to tell Solon, that never man is happy then,
since he never is so, but when he is no more.

         ----- Quisqua

  Vix radicitus e vita se tollit, et ejicit


  Se facit esse qui quiddam super inscius ipse

  Nee removet satis a projecto corpora sese, et

  Vindicat./1

----- 1 LUCRET.  Rer. nat. 1. iii. 912.

  Scarce any rids himselfe of life so cleer

  But leaves unwitting some part of him heere

  Nor frees or quits himselfe sufficientl

  From that his body which forlorne doth lie.

     Bertrand of Glesquin died at the siege of the castle of Rancon,
     neere unto Puy in Avergne: the besieged yeelding afterwards, were
     forced to carry the keies of the Castle, upon the deceased of the
     Captaine.  Bartholomew of Alviano, Generall of the Venetian
     forces dying in their service and wars about Brescia, and his
     bodie being to be transported to Venice, through the territorie
     of Verona, which was then enemie unto them, the greatest part of
     the army thought it expedient to demand a safe conduct for their
     passage of those of Verona, to which Theodore Trivulcio stoutly
     opposed himselfe, and chose rather to pass it by main force and
     to hazard the day, saying it was not convenient that he who in
     his life time had never apprehended feare of his enemies should
     now being dead, seeme to feare them.  Verily in like matters by
     the lawes of Greece, hee that required a dead body of his
     enemies, with intent to bury the same, renounced the victory, and
     might no more erect any trophy of it: and he who was so required,
     purchased the title of honour and gaine.  So did Nicias lose the
     advantage hee had clearely gained of the Corinthians; and
     contrariwise, Ageshaus assured that, hee doubtfully had gotten of
     the Boeotians.  These actions might bee deemed strange, if in all
     ages it were not a common-received opinion, not only to extend
     the care of our selves, beyond this life, but also to beleeve,
     that heavenly favours doe often accompany us unto our grave, and
     continue in our posterity.  Whereof there are so many examples
     (leaving our moderne a part that I need not wade farre into it.

Edward the first King of England, in the long wars he had with Robert
King of Scotland, having by triall found how greatly his presence
advantaged the successe of his affaires, and how he was ever
victorious in any enterprise he undertooke in his owne person; when
hee died, bound his sonne by solemne oath, that being dead he should
cause his body to be boyled, untill the flesh fell from the bones,
which he should cause to be interred, and carefully keeping the bones,
ever carry them about him, whenever hee should happen to have wars
with the Scots: As if destiny had fatally annexed the victory unto his
limmes.  John Zisca, who for the defence of Wickliff's opinions so
much troubled the state of Bohemia, commanded that after his death his
body should be flead, and a drum made of his skin, to be carried and
sounded in all the wars against his enemies: deeming the sound of it
would be a meanes to continue the advantages, which in his former
warres hee had obtained of them.  Certaine Indians did likewise carry
the bones of one of their Captaines in the skirmishes they had with
the Spaniards, in regard of the good successe hee had, whilest hee
lived, against them: And other nations of that new-found world, doe
likewise carry the bodies of such worthy aud fortunate men with them,
as have died in their battels, to serve them in stead of good fortune
and encouragement. The first examples reserve nothing else in their
tombes, but the reputation acquired by their former atchievements: but
these will also adjoyne unto it the power of working.  The act of
Captaine Bayard is of better composition, who perceiving himslef
deadly wounded by a shot received in his body, being by his men
perswaded to come off and retire himselfe from out the throng,
answered, he would not now so neere his end begin to turne his face
from his enemie: and having stoutly foughten so long as he could
stand, feeling himselfe to faint and stagger from his horse, commanded
his steward to lay him against a tree, but in such sort, that he might
die with his face toward the enemie; as indeed hee did.  I may not
omit this other example, as remarkable for this consideration, as any
of the precedent.  The Emperour Maximilian, great grand-father to
Philip now King of Spaine, was a Prince highly endowed with many noble
qualities, and amongst others with a well-nigh matchless comeliness of
body; but with other customes of his, hee had this one much contrarie
to other Princes, who to dispatch their weightiest affaires make often
their close- stoole their regall Throne or Council-Chamber, which was,
that hee would not permit any groome of his chamber (were hee never so
neere about him) to see him in his inner chamber, who if he had
occasion but to make water, would as nicely and as religiously
with-draw himselfe as any maiden, and never suffer so much as a
Pbysitian, much lesse any other whatsoever, to see those privie parts
that all in modestie seeke to keepe secret and unseene. My selfe, that
am so broad-mouthed and lavish in speeches, am notwithstanding
naturally touched with that bashfulnesse.  And unlesse it bee by the
motion of necessity or of voluptuousnesse, I never willingly imparted
those actions and parts (which custome willeth to bee concealed) to
the view of any creature. I endure more compulsion, then I deeme
befitting a man, especially of my profession.  But hee grew to such
superstition, that by expresse words in his last will and Testament,
hee commanded, that being dead, hee should have linnen-flops put about
them.  Hee should by codiche have annexeed unto it, that hee who
should put them on, might have his eies hood-winckt.  The instruction
which Cyrus giveth his children, that neither they nor any other
should either see or touch his body, after the breath were once out of
it; I ascribe it unto some motive of devotion in him.  For both his
historian and himselfe, amongst many other notable qualities they are
endued with, have throughout all the course of their life seemed to
have a singular respect and awfull reverence unto religion.  That
story displeased me very much, which a nobleman told me of a kinsman
of mine (a man very famous and well known both in peace and warre),
which is, that dying very aged in his court, being much tormented with
extreme pangs of the stone, hee with an earnest and unwearied care,
employed all his last houres, to dispose the honour and ceremony of
his funerals, and summoned all the nobilitie that came to visit him,
to give him assured premise to be as assistants, and to convey him to
his last resting place.  To the very same Prince, who was with him at
his last gasp, he made very earnest suit, he would command all his
household to wait upon him at his interment, inforcing many reasons,
and alleaging divers examples to prove that it was a thing very
convenient, and fitting a man of his qualitie: which assured promise
when he had obtained, and had at his pleasure marshalled the order how
they should march, he seemed quietly and contentedly to yeeld up the
ghost.  I have seldome seen a vanitie continue for so long.  This
other curiositie meere opposite unto it (which to prove I need not
labour for homeexamples) seemeth in my opinion cosen-german to this,
that is, when one is ever ready to breathe his last, carefully and
passionately to endevour how to reduce the convoy of his obsequies
unto some particular and unwonted parcimonie, to one servant and to
one lanterne.  I heare the humour and appointment of Marcus AEmilius
Lepidus commended, who expressly forbade his heires to use those
ceremonies about his interment, which in such cases were formerly
accustomed.  Is it temperance and frugalitie, to avoid charge and
voluptuousnesse, the use and knowledge of which is imperceptable unto
us?  Loe here an easie reformation, and of small cost.  Were it
requisite to appoint any, I would be of opinion, that as well in that,
as in all other actions of man's life, every man should referre the
rule of it to the qualitie of his fortune.  And the Philosopher Lycon
did wisely appoint his friends to place his body where they should
thinke it fittest and for the best: and for his obsequies, they should
neither be superfluous, and over-costly, nor base and sparing.  For my
part, I would wholly relie on custome, which should dispose this
ceremonie, and would yeeld my selfe to the discretion of the first or
next into whose hands I might chance to fall.  Totus hic locus est
contemnendus in nobis, non negligendus in nostris:/1 'All this matter
should be despised of us,

----- CICERO, Tusc.  Quaest. i. 45.


but not neglected of ours.' And religiously said a holy man; Curatio
funeris, conditio sepulturae, pompa exequiarum, magis sunt tivorum
solatia, quam subsidia mortuorum:/1 'In the procuration of funerals,
the maner of buriall, the pomp of obsequies, are rather comforts to
the living, than helps to the dead.' Therefore Socrates answered
Criton, who at the houre of his death asked him how he would be
buried: Even as you please, said he.  Were I to meddle further with
this subject, I would deeme it more gallant to imitate those who yet
living and breathing, undertake to enjoy the order and honour of their
sepulchres, and that please themselves to behold their dead
countenance in marble.  Happy they that can rejoyce and gratifle their
sense with insensibilitie, and live by their death!  A little thing
would make me conceive an inexpiable hatred against all popular
domination; although it seeme most naturall and just unto me; when I
call to minde that inhumane injustice of the Athenians, who without
further triall or remission, yea without suffering them so much as to
reply or answer for themselves, condemned those noble and worthy
Captaines, that returned victoriously from the sea-battell, which they
(neere the Iles Arginusae) had gained of the Macedenonians; the most
contested, bloodie and greatest fight the Grecians ever obtained by
sea with their owne forces: forsomuch as after the victory, they had
rather followed those occasions, which the law of warre presented unto
them, for their availe, than to their prejudice staid to gather and
bury their dead men.  And the successe of Diomedon makes their
ruthlesse execution more hatefull, who being a man of notable and
exemplar vertue, both military and politike, and of them so cruelly
condemned; after he had heard the bloody sentence, advancing himselfe
forward to speake, having fit opportunitie and plausible audience; he,
I say, in stead of excusing himselfe, or endevouring to justifie his
cause, or to exasperate the evident iniquity of so cruell a doome,
expressed but a care of the Judges preservation,

----- 1 AUG.  Civ.  Dei, l. i. c. 12, verb. apost. scr. 32.


earnestly beseeching the Gods to turne that judgement to their good,
  praying that for want of not satisfying the vowes which hee and his
  companions had vowed in acknowledgement and thanksgiving for so
  famous a victory, and honourable fortune, they might not draw the
  wrath and revenge of the Gods upon them, declaring what their vowes
  were.  And without more words, or any further reasons, couragiously
  addressed himselfe to his execution. But fortune some yeares after
  punished him alike, and made him taste of the verie same sauce.  For
  Chabrias, Captaine Generall of their sea-fleet, having afterward
  obtained a famous victory of Pollis, Admirall of Sparta, in the Ile
  of Naxos, lost absolutely the benefit of it, and onely contented
  with the day (a matter of great consequence for their affaires)
  fearing to incurre the mischiefe of this example, and to save a few
  dead carcasses of his friends, that floated up and downe the sea,
  gave leasure to an infinite number of his living enemies, whom he
  might easily have surprized to sail away in safety, who afterward
  made them to purchase their importunate superstition, at a
  deere-deere rate.  Quaeris, quo jaceas, post obitum, loc

  Quo non nata jacent./1


  Where shall you lie when you are dead?

  Where they lye that were never bred.


This other restores the sense of rest unto a body without a soule,

  Neque sepulchrum, quo recipiat, habeat portum corporis

  Vbi remissa humana vita, corpus requiescat a malis?/2


  To turne in as a hav'n, have he no grave

  Where life left, from all griefe he rest may have.


Even as Nature makes us to see, that many dead things have yet
certaine secret relations unto life.  Wine doth alter and change in
sellers, according to the changes and alterations of the seasons of
its vineyard.  And the flesh of wilde beasts and venison doth change
qualitie and taste in the powdering-tubs, according to the nature of
living flesh, as some say that have observed it.

----- 1 SEN.  Troas. chor. ii. 30. 2 Cic.  Tusc.  Qu. 1. i.  Enni

CHAPTER 1.IV+ HOW THE SOULE DISCHARGETH HER PASSIONS UPON FALSE
OBJECTS, WHEN THE TRUE FAILE IT

A GENTLFMAN of ours exceedingly subject to the gout, being instantly
solicited by his Physitions, to leave all manner of salt-meats, was
wont to answer pleasantly, that when the fits or pangs of the disease
tooke him, hee would have some body to quarell with; and that crying
and cursing, now against Bolonie-sausage, and sometimes by railing
against salt neats- tongues, and gammons of bakon, he found some ease.
But in good earnest even as the arme being lifted up to strike, if the
stroke hit not, but fall void, wee feele some paine in it, and many
times strike it out of joynt; and that to yeeld our sight pleasant, it
must not be lost and dispiersed in the vast ayre, but ought rather to
have a limited bound to sustaine it by a reasonable distance.

  Ventus ut amittit vires, nisi robore densae

  Occurrant silvae, spatio diffasus inani./1


  As windes in emptie ayre diffus'd, strength lose

  Unlesse thick-old-growne woods their strength oppose.

So seemes it that the soule moved and tossed, if she have not some
hold to take, loseth it selfe in it selfe, and must ever be stored
with some object, on which it light and worke.  Plutarch saith fitly
of those affectionate themselves to Monkies and little Dogges, that
the loving part which is in us, for want of a lawful hold, rather than
it will be idle, doth forge a false and frivolous hold unto itselfe.
And wee see that

----- 1 LUCAN, 1. iii. 362.


the soule in her passions doth rather deceive itselfe, by framing a
false and fantasticall subject unto itselfe, yea against her owne
conceit, than not to worke upon something.  So doth their owne rage
transport beasts to set upon the stone or weapon that hath hurt them;
yea and sometimes with irefull teeth to revenge themselves against
themselves, for the hurt or smart they feele.

  Pannonis haud aliter post utum saevior urs

  Cui jaculum parva Lybis amentavit habena

  Se rotat in vulnus, telumque irata receptu

  Impetit, et secum fugientem circuit hastam./1


  Even so the wound-enraged Austrian beare

  On whom a Moore hath thir'ld his slinged speare

  Wheeles on her wound, and raging bites the dart

  Circling that flies with her, and cannot part.


What causes doe wee not invent, for the crosses that happen unto us?
bee it right, or wrong: what take we not hold of, to have something to
strive withall?  It is not the golden locks thou tearest, nor the
whitenesse of the breast, which thou through vexation so cruelly dost
smite, that have by meanes of an unluckie bullet, lost thy
deere-beloved brother: on something else shouldest thou wreake
thyselfe.  Livius speaking of the Romane army in Spaine, after the
losse of two great Captaines that were brethren.  Flere omnes repente,
et offensare capita:/2 'They all wept and often beat their heades.' It
is an ordidarie custome: And the philosopher Byon was very pleasant
with the king, that for griefe tore his haire, when he said, 'Doth
this man thinke, that baldnesse will asswage his griefe? who hath not
seene some to chew and swallow cardes, aw wel-nigh choake themselves
with bales of dice, only to be revenged for the losse of some money?'
Xerxes whipped the Sea, and writ a cartell of defiance to the hill
Athos: And Cyrus for many daies together ammused his whole armie to be
revenged of the river Gyndus, for the feare be tooke passing over the
same: And Caligula caused a verie faire house to be defaced,

----- 1 LUCAN, lib. vi. 220. 2 Liv.  Dec. iii. lib. 5.


for the pleasure his mother had received in the same.  When I was
young, my countrimen were wont to say, That one of our
neigbbour-Kings, having received a blow at Gods hand, sware to be
revenged on him, and ordained, that for ten yeares space no man should
pray unto him, nor speak of him, nor (so long as he were in
authority), beleeve in him.  By which report, they doe not so much
publish the sottishnesse, as the ambitious glorie, peculiar unto that
nation of whom it was spoken.  They are vices that ever goe together:
But in truth such actions enclime rather unto selfe-conceit, than to
fondnes.  Augustus Caesar having beene beaten by a tempest on the sea,
defied the God Neptune, and in the celebration of the Circensian
games, that so he might be avenged on him, he caused his image to be
removed from out the place, where it stood amongst the other Gods;
wherein he is also less excusable, than the former, and lesse than hee
was afterward, when having lost a battel, under Quintilius Varus in
Germanie, all in a rage and desperate, he went up and downe beating
his bead against the walls, mainly crying out: 'Oh!  Varus, restore me
my Souldiers againe:' For, those exceed, all follie (forsomuch as
impietie is joyned unto it that will wreake themselves against God, or
fortune, as if she had eares subject to our batterie: In imitation of
the Thracians, who when it lightens or thunders, begin with a Titanian
revenge to shoot against heaven, thinking by shooting of arrowes to
draw God to some reason.  Now, as saith that ancient Poet in Plutarch,

  Point ne se faut corroucer aux affaires

  Il ne leur chaut de toutes noz coleres./1


  We ought not angry be at what God dooth

  For he cares not who beares an angry tooth.

But we shall never raile enough against the disorder and unrulinesse
of our minde.

----- 1 PLUTAR.  Of Contentment, ch. iv. in Amyot's transl.

CHAPTER 1.V+ WHETHER THE CAPTAINE OF A PLACE BESIEGED OUGHT TO SALLIE
FORTH TO PARLIE

LVCIUS MARCIUS Legate of the Romans, in the warre against Perseus King
of Macedon, desirous to get so much time, as he wanted to prepare his
army, gave out some motives of accord, wherewith the king inveagled,
yeelded unto a truce for certaine daies: by which meanes he furnished
his enemie with opportunitie and leasure to arme himselfe: whereof
proceeded the Kings last ruine and over-throw.  Yet is it, that the
elders of the Senate, mindfull of their fore-fathers customes,
condemned this practice as an enemie to their ancient proceedings,
which was, said they, to fight with vertue, and not with craft, not by
surprises, or stratagems by night, nor by set-flights, and unlookt-for
approches, never undertaking a warre, but after it was proclaimed, yea
many times after the appointed houre and place of the battell. With
this conscience did they send backe to Pirrhus his traitorous
Physitian, and to the Phalisci their disloyall schoolemaster.  These
were true Romane+ proceedings, and not Grecian policies, nor Punike
whes, with whom to vanquish by force is lesse glorious than to conquer
by treacherie.  To deceive may serve for the instant but hee only is
judged to be overcome, that knowes he was not vanquished by craft or
deceit, nor by fortune or chance, but by meere valour, betweene troupe
and troupe, in an overt and just warre. {rules of war+} It appeareth
manifestly by the speech of these good men, they had not yet received
this sentence.

  Dolus, an virtus, quis in hoste requirat?/1

  Deceit, or vertue, either, in foes, it skills not whether.

The Achaians, saith Polibius, detested all manner of deceit in their
warres, deeming that no victorie, where their enemies courages were
not quelled. Eam vir sanctus, et sapiens sciat esse victoriam veram,
quae salva fide, et integra dignitate parabitur. 'A wise and religious
man will know that is victorie indeed, which shall be attained with
credit unimpeached, and dignitie untainted,' saith another.

  Vos ne velit, an me regnare hera, quid-ve ferat fors

  Virtute experiamur./2


  If fortune will have you to raigne, or me

  And what chance brings, let vertue's triall be.

In the Kingdome of Ternates, among those nations, which wee so full-
mouthed, call barbarous, the custome beareth, that they never
undertake a warre, before the same be denounced; thereunto adding an
ample declaration of the meanes they have to employ therein, what
manner, and how many men, what munition, and what Armes either
offensive or defensive: which done, they also establish as a law, that
without reproach or imputation, it shall be lawfull for any man, in
their warres, to use what advantage soever, may in any sort further or
help them to vanquish.  The ancient Florentines were so far from
desiring any advantage of their enemies by sudden surprises, that a
moneth before they could bring their Armie into the field, they would
give them warning, by the continuall sound of their common bell, which
they called Martinella.  As for us, who are lesse superstitious, and
deeme him to have the honour of the warre, that hath the profit of it,
and according to Lisander, say, that 'Where the Lions-skinne will not
suffice, wee must adde a scantling of the Foxes;' the most ordinarie
occasions of surprises are drawne from this practice, and as wee say,
there is no time, wherein a Captaine ought to be more warie and
circumspect to looke about him, than

----- 1 VIR.  AEn. 1. ii. 390. 2 CIC.  Offic. 1. i. ex.  ENN. de
Pyrrh.


that of parlies, and treaties of accord: And therefore is it a common
rule in the mouth of all our modern men of warre, that the Governour
or Commaunder of a besieged place, ought never to sallie forth
himselfe to parlie.  In the time of our forefathers, the same was cast
in the teeth (as a reproach) unto the Lord of Montmord and Assigni,
who defended Mouson, against the Earle of Nanseaw.  Yet in this case
it were excusable in him, that should so sallie out, that the
assurance and advantage, might still be on his side.  As did the Earle
Guido Rangoni in the Citie of Reggio (if credit may be given to
Bellay: for Guicciardin affirmeth, that it was himselfe) when as the
Lord of Escute, comming to parlie made his approaches unto it; for he
did so little forsake his fort, that whilest they were in parlie, a
commotion being raised, the Lord of Escute and the troupes which came
with him, in that tumult found himselfe to be the weakest, so that
Alexander Trivultio was there slaine, and hee deeming it the safest
way, was forced to follow the Earle, and on his word to yield himselfe
to the mercie and shelter of blowes, into the Citie.  Eumenes in the
Citie of Nera, being urged by Antigenus, that besieged him, to sallie
forth to parlie, alleaging that there was reason he should come to
him, sith he was the better man, and the stronger: after he had made,
this noble answer, 'I will never thinke any man better than myselfe,
so long as I can hold or rule my sword;' nor did he ever yeeld untill
Antigonus had delivered him Ptolomey, his owne nephew for a pledge,
whom he required.  Yet shall we see some to have prospered well in
sallying foorth of their holdes to parlie, upon the word and honor of
the assailant; witnes Henrie of Vaulx, a knight of Champaigns, who
being beleagred by the English-men in the Castle of Commercie, and
Bartholmew of Bones, who at that siege commaunded as Chiefe having
caused the greatest part of the Castle to be undermined, so that there
wanted nothing but the giving of fire, utterly to subvert the same,
under the ruines of it, summoned the said Henrie to issue out, and for
his owne good to parlie with him, which he did, accompanied but with
three more, who manifestly seeing the evident ruine, wherein he was
undoubtedly like to fall, acknowledged himselfe infinitely beholding
to his enemies unto whose discretion, after he had yeelded together
with his troup, and that fire the Castle was given to the Mine, the
maine props of the Castle failing, it was utterly overthrowne and
carried away.  I am easily perswaded to yeeld to other mens words and
faith, but hardly would I doe it, when I should give other men cause
to imagine, that I had rather done it through despare and want of
courage, than of a free and voluntary choise, and confidence in his
honestie and well-meaning.

CHAPTER 1.VI+ THAT THE HOURE OF PARLIES IS DANGEROUS

NOTWITHSTANDING I saw lately, that those of Musidan, a place not farre
from mee, who with others of their partie were by our forces compelled
to dislodge thence, exclaimed, they were betraid, because during the
speech of accord, and the treatie yet continuing, they had beene
surprized and defeated; which thing might haply other ages have had
some apparence of truth; but, I say, our manner of proceeding in such
cases, is altogether differing from these rules, and no man ought to
expect performance of promise from an enemie, except the last seale of
bond be fully annexed thereunto, wherein notwithstanding is then much
care and vigilancie required, and much adoe shall be found.  And it
was ever a dangerous counsell to trust the performance of word or oath
given unto a Citie, that yeelds unto gentle and favourable
composition, and in that furie to give the needie, bloudthirstie, and
prey-greed Souldier free entrance into it, unto the free choise and
licence of a victorious armie.  Lucius Emilius Regulus a Romane
Proctor, having lost his time in attempting by force to take the Citie
of the Phocens by reason of the singular prowesse, which the
inhabitants shewed, in stoutly defending themselves, covenanted to
receive them as friends unto the people of Rome, and to enter their
Citie as a place confederate, removing all feare of hostile-action
from them.  But to the end hee might apeare more glorious and
dreadfull, having caused his armie to enter with him, doe what he
might, be could not bridle the rage of his Souldiers; and with his
owne eies saw most part of the Citie ransacked and spoiled: the rights
of covetousnesse and revenge supplanting those of his authoritie and
militarie discipline.  Cleomenes was wont to say, that 'What hurt
soever a man might doe his enemies in time of warre, was beyond
justice, and not subject unto it, as well towards the Gods as towards
men:' who for seven dayes having made truce with those of Argos, the
third night, whilest they were all asleepe mistrusting no harme, hee
charged and overthrew them, aleaging for his excuse, that in the truce
no mention had beene made of nights. But the Gods left not his
perfidious policie unrevenged: For during their enter- parlie and
businesse about taking hostages, the Citie of Casilinum was by
surprise taken from him: which happened in the times of the justest
Captaines, and of the most perfect Romane discipline: For it is not
said, that time and place serving, wee must not make use and take
advantage of our enemies foolish oversight, as we doe of their
cowardise.  And verily warre hath naturally many reasonable privileges
to the prejudice of reason. And here failes the rule; Neminem id
agere, ut ex alterius praedetur inscitia:/1 'That no man should
endeavour to prey upon another mans ignorance.' But I wonder of the
scope that Xenophon allowes them, both by his discourse, and by divers
exploits of his perfect Emperour: an Author of wonderfull consequence
in such things, as a great Captaine and a Philosopher, and one of
Socrates chiefest Disciples, nor doe I altogether yeeld unto the
measure of his dispensation.  The Lord of Aubigny besieging Capua,
after he had given it a furious batterie, the Lord Fabritius Colonna,
Captaine of the towne, having from under a bastion or skonce begunne
to parlie, and his men growing negligent and carelesse in their
offices and guard, our men did suddenly take the advantage offered
them, entered the towne, over-ranne it, and put all to the sword.  But
to come to later examples, yea in our memorie, the Lord Iulio Romero
at Yvoy, having committed this

----- 1 Cic.  Offic. 1. iii.

oversight to issue out of his holde, to parlie with the Constable of
France, at his returne found the Towne taken, and himselfe
jack-out-of- doores.  But that wee may not pass out unrevenged, the
Marques of Pescara beleagering Genova, where the Duke Octavian Fregoso
commanded under our protection, and an accord between them having so
long been treated, and earnestly solicited, that it was held as
ratified, and upon the point of conclusion, the Spaniards being entred
the Towne, and seeing themselves the stronger, tooke their
opportunitie and used it as a full and compleate victorie: and since
at Lygny in Baroe, where the Earle of Brienne commanded, the Emperour
having besieged him in person, and Bartholemy Lieutenant to the saide
Earle, being come foorth of his hold to parlie, was no sooner out,
whilest they were disputing, but the Towne was surprised, and he
excluded, They say,

  Fu il vincer sempre mai laudabil cosa

  Vincasi o per fortuna o per ingegno./1


  To be victorious, evermore was glorious,

  Be we by fortune or by wit victorious.

But the Philosopher Chrsippus would not have beene of that opinion;
nor I neither, for be was wont to say, 'That those who run for the
masterie may well employ all their strength to make speed, but it is
not lawfull for them to lay hands on their adversaries, to stay him,
or to crosse legges, to make him trip or fall.' And more generously
answered Alexander the Great, at what time Polypercon perswaded him to
use the benefit of the advantage which the darknesse of the night
afforded him, to charge Darius. 'No, no,' said hee, 'it fits not mee
to hunt after night-stolne victories;' mato me fortunae paeniteat,
quam tictoriae pudeat./2 I had rather repent me of my fortune, than be
ashamed of my victorie.

  Atque idem fugientem haud est dignatus Orode

  Sternere, nec jacta caecum dare cuspide vulnus:

----- 1 ARIST. cant. xv. stan. 1. 2 CURT. 1. iv.

  Obvius adversoque occurrit, seque viro vi

  Contulit, haud furto melior, sed fortibus armis./1


  He deign'd not to strike downe Orodes flying

  Or with his throwne-launce blindely-wound him running

  But man to man afront himselfe applying

  Met him, as more esteem'd for strength than cunning.

----- VIRG.  AEn.1.x.732.

CHAPTER 1.VII+ THAT OUR INTENTION JUDGETH OUR ACTIONS

The common saying is, that "Death acquits us of all our bonds.' I know
some that have taken it in another sence.  Henry the seventh, King of
England, made a composition with Philip, son to Maximilian the
Emperour or (to give him a more honorable title) father to the
Emperour Charles the fifth, that the said Philip should (deliver into
his hands the Duke of Suffolke, his mortall enemie, who was fled out
of England, and saved himself in the Low countries, always provided
the king should attempt nothing against the Dukes life; which promise
notwithstanding, being neere his end, he expresly by will and
testament commanded his succeeding-sonne, that immediately after his
decease, he should cause him to be put to death.  In the late
tragedie, which the Duke of Alva presented us withall at Brussels, on
the Earles of Horne and Egmond were many remarkable things and worthy
to be noted: and amongst others, that the said Count Egmond upon whose
faithfull word and assurance, the Earle of Horne was come in and
yeelded himselfe to the Duke of Alva, required very instantly to be
first put to death, to the end his death might acquit and free him of
the word_and_bond+, which he ought and was engaged for, to the said
Earle of Horne.  It seemeth that death hath no whit discharged the
former of his word given, and that the second, without dying was quit
of it.  We cannot be tied beyond our strength and meanes.  The reason
is, because the effects and executions are not any way in our power,
and except our will, nothing is truly in our power {Epictetus+}: on it
onely are all the rules of man's dutie grounded and established by
necessitie. And therefore Count Egmond, deeming his minde and will
indebted to his promise, how beit the power to effect it, lay not in
his hands; was no doubt cleerely absolved of his debt and dutie,
although be had survived the Count Horne.  But the King of England
failing of his word by his intention, cannot be excused, though hee
delaide the execution of his disloyaltie untill after his death.  No
more than Herodotus his Mason who during his natural life, having
faithfully kept the secret of his Master the King of AEgypts treasure,
when he died discovered the same unto his children. I have in my dayes
seene many convicted by their owne conscience, for detaining other
men's goods, yet by their last will and testament to dispose
themselves, after their decease to make satisfaction.  This is nothing
to the purpose. Neither to take time for a matter so urgent, nor with
so small interest or shew of feeling, to goe about to establish an
injurie.  They are indebted somewhat more.  And by how much more they
pay incommodiously and chargably, so much the more just and
meritorious is their satisfaction.  Penitence ought to charge, yet doe
they worse, who reserve the revealing of some heinous conceit or
affection towards their neighbour, to their last will and affection,
having whilest they lived ever kept it secret.  And seeme to have
little regard of their owne honour, by provoking the partie offended
against their owne memory, and lesse of their conscience, since they
could never for the respect of death cancell their ill-grudging
affection, and in extending life beyond theirs.  Oh wicked and ungodly
judges, which referre the judgement of a cause to such time as they
have no more knowledge of causes!  I will as neere as I can prevent,
that my death reveale or utter any thing, my life hath not first
publikely spoken.

CHAPTER 1.VIII+ OF IDLENESSE

As we see some idle-fallow grounds, if they be fat and fertile, to
bring foorth store and sundry roots of wilde and unprofitable weeds,
and that to keep them in use we must subject and imploy them with
certain seeds for our use and service; and as wee see some women,
though single and alone, often to bring foorth lumps of shapelesse
flesh, whereas to produce a perfect and naturall generation, they must
be manured with another kinde of seed; so is it of mindes, which
except they be busied about some subject, that may bridle and keepe
them under, they will here and there wildely scatter themselves
through the vast field of imaginations.

  Sicut aquae tremulum labris ubi lumnen aheni

  Sole repercwsum, aut radiantis imagine Lunae

  Omnia pervolitat late loca jamque sub aura

  Erigitur, summique ferit laquearia tecti.


  As trembling light reflected from the Sunne

  Or radiant Moone on water-fild brasse lavers

  Flies over all, in aire unpraised soone

  Strikes house-top beames, betwixt both strangely wavers.

And there is no folly, or extravagant raving, they produce not in that
agitation.

   ----- velut aegri somnia, vana

  Finguntur species./2

  Like sicke mens dreames, that feigne

  Inaginations vaine.

The minde that hath no fixed bound, will easily loose VIRG.
AEn. 1. viii. 22.  HOR.  Art.  Poet. vii.  itselfe: For, as we say,
'To be everiewhere, is to be nowhere.'

  Quisquis ubigue habitat, Maxime, nusquam habitat./1


  Good sir, he that dwels everywhere

  No where can say, that he dwels there.

It is not long since I retired myselfe unto mine owne house, with full
purpose, as much as lay in me, not to trouble myselfe with any
businesse, but solitarily and quietly to weare out the remainder of my
well-nighspent life; where me thought I could doe my spirit no greater
favour, than to give him the full scope of idlenesse, and entertaine
him as he best pleased, and withall, to settle himselfe as he best
liked: which I hoped he might now, being by time become more setled
and ripe, accomplish very easily: but I finde, Variam semper dant otia
mentem./2 Evermore idlenesse Doth wavering mindes addresse.

That contrariwise playing the skittish and loosebroken jade, he takes
a hundred times more cariere and libertie unto himselfe, than hee did
for others, and begets in me so many extravagant Chimeraes, and
fantasticall monsters, so orderlesse, and without any reason, one
hudling upon another, that at leasure to view the foolishnesse and
monstrous strangenesse of them, I have begun to keepe a register of
them, hoping, if I live, one day to make him ashamed, and blush at
himselfe.

----- 1 MART. 1. vii.  Epig. 72, 6. 2 LUCAN, L iv. 704.

CHAPTER 1.IX+ OF LYERS

THERE is no man living, whom it may lesse beseeme to speake of
memorie+, than myselfe, for to say truth, I have none at all: and am
fully perswaded that no mans can be so weake and forgetfull as mine.
All other parts are in me common and vile, but touching memorie, I
thinke to carrie the prise from all other, that have it weakest, nay
and to gaine the reputation of it, besides the naturall want I endure
(for truely considering the necessitie of it, Plato hath reason to
name it a great and mighty goddesse).  In my countrie, if a man will
imply that one hath no sense, he will say, such a one hath no memorie:
and when I complaine of mine, they reprove me, and will not beleeve
me, as if I accused myselfe to be mad and senselesse. They make no
diference betweene memorie and wit: which is an empairing of my
market: But they doe me wrong, for contrariwise it is commonly seene
by experience, that excellent memories do rather accompany weake
judgements. Moreover they wrong me in this (who can do nothing so well
as to be a perfect_friend+) that the same words which accuse my
infirmitie, represent ingratitude. From my affection they take hold of
my memorie, and of a naturall defect, they infer a want of judgement
or conscience.  Some will say, he hath forgotten this entreaty or
request, or that promise, he is not mindful of his old friends, he
never remembered to say, or doe, or conceale this or that, for my
sake.  Verily I may easily forget, but to neglect the charge my friend
hath committed to my trust, I never do it.  Let them beare with my
infirmitie, and not conclude it to be a kind of malice; which is so
contrarie an enemie to my humor.  Yet am I somewhat comforted.  First,
because it is an evil, from which I have chieflie drawne the reason to
correct a worse mischiefe, that would easily have growne upon me, that
is to say, ambition+; which defect is intolerable in them that meddle
with worldly negotiations.  For as divers like examples of natures
progresse, say, she hath happily strengthened other faculties in me,
according as it hath growne weaker and weaker in me, and I should
easily lay downe and wire-draw my minde and judgement, upon other mens
traces, without exercising their proper forces, if by the benefit of
memorie, forren inventions and strange opinions were present with me.
That my speech is thereby shorter for the Magazin of Memorie is
peradventure more stored with matter, than is the store-house of
Invention.  Had it held out with me, I had ere this wearied all my
friends with pratling: the subjects rouzing the meane facultie I have
to manage employ them, strengthening and wresting my discourses. It is
pitie; I have assayed by the trial of some of my private friends:
according as their memory hath ministered them a whole and perfect
matter, who recoile their narration so farre-backe, and stuff it with
so many vaine circumstances, that if the story bee gqod, they smoother
the goodnesse of it: if bad, you must needs either curse the good
fortune of their memorie, or blame the misfortune of their judgement.
And it is no easie matter, being in the midst of the cariere of a
discourse, to stop cunningly, to make a sudden period, and to cut it
off.  And there is nothing whereby the cleane strength of a horse is
more knowne, than to make a readie and cleane stop.  Among the
skilfull I see some that strive, but cannot stay their race.  Whilest
they labour to finde the point to stop their course, they stagger and
falter, as men that faint through weaknesse.  Above all, old men are
dangerous, who have onely the memorie of things past left them, and
have lost the remembrance of their repetitions.  I have heard some
very pleasant reports become most irkesome and tedious in the mouth of
a certaine Lord, forsomuch as all the bye-standers had many times
beene cloyed with them.  Secondly (as said an ancient Writers that I
doe not so much remember injuries received.  I had need have a
prompter as Darius had, who not to forget the wrong he had received of
the Athenians, whensoever he sate downe at his table, caused a page to
sing unto him, 'Sir, remember the Athenians,' and that the places or
bookes which I read over, do ever smile upon me with some new
noveltie.  It is not without reason, men say, that be who hath not a
good and readie memorie should never meddle with telling of lies, and
feare to become a liar.  I am not ignorant how the Grammarians make a
difference betweene speaking untrue and lying; and say that to speake
untruly is to speake that which is false, but was reputed true; and
that the definition of the Latin word, mentiri, whence the French
word, mentir, is derived, which in English is to lie, implieth and
meaneth to goe against ones conscience: and by consequence it
concerneth onely those, who speake contrary to that which they know,
of whom I speake.  Now, these, either invent, seale, stampe and all,
or else they disguise and change a true ground.  When they disguise or
change, if they be often put to the repetition of one thing, it is
hard for them to keepe still in one path, and very strange if they
lose not themselves: because the thing, as it is, having first taken
up her stand in the memory, and there by the way of knowledge and
witting, imprinted itselfe, it were hard it should not represent
itselfe to the imagination, displacing and supplanting falshood, which
therein can have no such footing, or setled fastnesse; and that the
circumstances of the first learning, still diving into the minde,
should not cause it to disperse the remembrance of all false or
bastardizing parts gotten together. Where they altogether invent,
forsomuch as there is no certaine impression, to front their falshood,
they seeme to have so much the lesser feare to mistake or forget
themselves, which also notwithstanding being an airie bodie, and
without hold-fast may easily escape the memorie, except it be well
assured, whereof I have often do my no small pleasure) seene the
experience, at the cost of those, who professe never to frame their
speech, but as, best shall fit the affaires they negotiate, and as
best shall please the great men they speak unto.  For the
circumstances to which they will subject their credit and conscience,
being subject to many changes, their speech must likewise diversifie
and change with them, whence it followeth that of one selfsame subject
they speak diversly, as now yellow, now gray, to one man thus, and
thus to another.  And if peradventure these kind of men hoard-up their
so contrarie instructions, what becomes of this goodly art?  Who
besides, often most foolishly forget themselves, and run at randon:
For what memorie shall suffice them, to remember so many different
formes they have framed to one same subject?  I have in my dayes seene
divers that have envied the reputation of this worthy kind of
wisedome, who perceive not, that if there be a reputation, there can
be no effect.  Verily, lying is an ill and detestable vice.  Nothing
makes us men, and no other meanes keeps us bound one to another, but
our word+; knew we but the horror and weight of it, we would with fire
and sword pursue and hate the same, and more justly than any other
crime.  I see all men generally busied (and that verie improperly) to
punish certaine innocent errours in children which have neither
impression nor consequence, and chastice and vex them for rash and
fond actions.  Onely lying and stubbornnesse somewhat more, are the
faults whose birth and progresse I would have severely punished and
cut off; for they grow and increase with them: and if the tongue have
once gotten this ill-habit, good Lord how hard, nay how impossible it
is to make her leave it? whereby it ensueth, that we see many very
honest men in other matters, to bee subject and enthralled to that
fault.  I have a good lad to my tailour, whom I never heard speak a
truth, no not when it might stand him instead of profit.  If a lie had
no more faces+ but one, as truth had, we should be in farre better
termes than we are: For whatsoever a lier should say, we would take it
in a contrarie sense.  But the opposite of truth has many shapes, and
an undefinite field.  The Pythagoreans make good to be certaine and
finite and evil to be infinite and uncertain.  A thousand by-wayes
misse the marke, one onely hits the same.  Surely I can never assure
myselfe to come to a good end, to warrant an extreme evident danger,
by a shamelesse and solemne lie.  An ancient father saith, 'We are
better in the companie of a known dogge, than in a mans societie,
whose speech is unknowne to us.  Vt externus alieno non sit hominis
vice: 'A stranger to a stranger is not like a man.' And how much is a
false speech lesse sociable than silence?  King Francis the first,
vaunted himselfe to have by this meanes brought Francis Taverna,
ambassador to Francis Sforza, Duke of Millane, to a non- plus; a man
very famous for his rare eloquence, and facilitie in speech, who had
beene dispatched to excuse his master, toward his Majestie, of a
matter of great importance, which was this.  The King to keepe ever
some intelligence in Italy, whence he had lately beene expelled, but
especially in the Dukedome of Millane, thought it expedient to
entertaine a Gentleman of his about the Duke, in effect as his
Ambassador, but in apparence as a private man; who should make shew to
reside there about his particular affairess, forsomuch as the Duke,
who depended much more of the Emperour (chiefely then that he was
treating a marriage with his niece, daughter of the King of Denmarke,
who is at this day Dowager of Loraine) could not without great
prejudice unto himselfe discover to have any correspondencie and
conference with us.  For which commission and purpose a Gentleman of
Millane, named Merveille, then serving the King in place of one of the
Quiers of his Quierie, was deemed fit.  This man being dispatched with
secret letters of credence, and instructions of an Ambassador,

----- 1 PLIN.  Nat.  Hist. 1. vii. c. 1.

venient forces, as should be required to withstand so mightie, and set
upon so puisant a King, and alleaging certaine pertinent reasons: The
Ambassador fondly and unfitly replied, that himselfe had long before
maturely considered them and had told the Pope of them.  By which
answer so farre from his proposition (which was with all speed, and
without more circumstances to undertake and undergoe a dangerous
warre) the King of England tooke hold of the first argument which in
effect he afterward found true, which was, that the said Ambassador,
in his owne particular intent, was more affected to the French side,
whereof advertising his master, his goods were all confiscate,
himselfe disgraced, and he very hardly escaped with life.

CHAPTER 1.X+ OF READIE OR SLOW SPEECH

  Onc ne furent a tous toutes qraces donnees.


  All God's good graces are not gone

  To all, or of all anyone.

So doe we see that in the gift of eloquence, some have such a facility
and promptitude, and that which we call utterance, so easie and at
command, that at all assaies, and upon everie occasion, they are ready
and provided; and others more slow, never speake anything except much
laboured and premeditated, as Ladies and daintie Dames are taught
rules to take recreations and bodily exercises, according to the
advantage of what they have fairest about them. If I were to give the
like counsel, in those two different advantages of eloquence whereof
Preachers and pleading-lawiers of our age seeme to make profession;
the slow speaker in mine opinion should be the better preacher, and
the other the better lawier.  Forsomuch as charge of the first allowes
him as much leisure as he pleaseth to prepare himselfe; moreover his
cariere continueth still in one kinde without interruption: whereas
the lawyers occasions urging him still upon any accident to be ready
to enter the lists: and the unexpected replies and answers of his
adverse parlie, do often divest him from his purpose, wher he is
enforced to take a new course. Yet is it, that at the last enterview
which was at Marseilles betweens Pope Clement the seventh, and Francis
the first, our King, it hapned cleane contrarie, where Monsieur Poyet,
a man of chiefe reputation, and all dayes of his life brought up to
plead at the bar, whose charge being to make an Oration before the
Pope, and having long time before premeditated and con'd the [REDO 43]
remaineth mute, if he have no leisure to prepare himselfe, and he
likewise to whom leisure giveth no advantage to say better, are both
in one selfe degree of strangeness. It is reported that Severus
Cassius spake better extempore, and without premeditation.  That he
was more beholding to fortune, than to his diligence; that to be
interrupted in his speech redounded to his profit: and that his
adversaries feared to urge him, lest his sudden anger should redouble
his eloquence.  I know this condition of nature by experience, which
cannot abide a vehement and laborious premeditation: except it hold a
free, a voluntarie, and selfe pleasing course, it can never come to a
good end. We commonly say of some compositions, that they smell of the
oile {sprezzatura+}, and of the lampe, by reason of a certaine
harshnesse, and rudenesse, which long plodding labour imprints in them
that be much elaborated.  But besides the care of well-doing, and the
contention of the minde, overstretched to her enterprise, doth breake
and impeach the same; even as it hapneth unto water, which being
closely pent in, through its owne violence and abundance, cannot finde
issue at an open gullet.  In this condition of nature, whereof I now
speake, this also is joyned unto it, that it desireth not to be
pricked forward by these strong passions, as the anger of Cassius (for
that motion would be overrude) it ought not to be violently shaken,
but yeeldingly solicited: it desireth to be rouzed and prickt forward
by strange occasions, both present and casual.  If it go alone, it
doth but languish and loyteron is her life and grace.  I canuot well
conataine myselfe in mine owne possession and disposition, chance hath
more interest in it than myselfe; occasion, company, yea the change of
my voice drawes more from my minde than I can finde therein, when by
myselfe I second and endevor to employ the same.  My words likewise
are better than my writings, if choice may be had in so worthlesse
things.  This also hapheth unto me, that where I seeke myselfe, I
finde not myselfe: and I finde myselfe more by chance, than by the
search of mine owne judgement.  I shall perhaps have cast foorth some
suttletie in writing, haply dull and harsh for another, but smooth and
curious for myselfe.  Let us leave all these complements and
quaintnesse. That is spoken by everie man, according to his owne
strength, I have so lost it, that I wot not what I would have said,
and strangers have sometilnes found it before me.  Had I alwayes a
razor about me, where that hapneth, I should cleane raze myselfe out.
Fortune may at some other time make the light thereof appeare brighter
unto me than that of mid-day, and will make mee wonder at mine owne
faltring or sticking in the myre.

CHAPTER 1.XI + OF PROGNOSTICATIONS

As touching Oracles it is very certaine, that long before the comming
of our Saviour Iesus Christ, they had begun to lose their credit: for
we see that Cicero laboureth to finde the cause of their declination:
and these be his words: Cur isto modo jam oracula Delphis non eduntur,
non modo nostra aetate, sed jamdiu, ut nihil possit esse
contemptius?|1 'Why in like sort are not oracles now uttered, not
onely in our times, but a good while since, so as now nothing can be
more contemptible?' But as for other Prognostikes, that were drawne
from the anatomie of beasts in sacrifice, to which Plato doth in some
sort ascribe the naturall constitution of the intermall members of
them, of the scraping of chickens, of the flight of birds, Aves
quasdam rerum augurandarum causa natas esse putamus:/2 'We are of
opinion', certain birds were even bred to prognosticate some things;
of thunders, of turnings and backe-recourse of rivers.' Multa cernunt
aruspices: multa augures provident: multa oraculis declarantur: multa
vaticinationibus: multa somniis: multa portentis:/3 'Soothsayers see
much: bird-prophets foresee as much: much is foretold by Oracles; much
by prophecies; much by portentuous signes,' and others, upon which
antiquitie grounded most of their enterprises, as well publike as
private: our religion hath abolished them.  And albeit there remaine
yet amongst us some meanes of divination in the starres, in spirits;
in shapes of the

----- 1 CIC.  Divin. 1. ii. 2 Id.  Nat.  Deor. 3 Id. ib. 1. ii.

body in dreames, and elsewhere a notable example of the mad and fond
curiositie of our nature, ammusing it selfe to preoccupate future
things, as if it had not enough to doe to digest the present.

      ----- cur hanc titi, rector Olympi

  Sollicitis mortalibus addere curam

  Noscant venturas ut dira per omnia clade

  Bit subitum quodcunque paras, sit caeca futur

  Mens hominum fati, liceat sperare timenti./2


  Why pleas'd it thee, thou ruler of the spheares,

  To adde this care to mortals care-clog'd minde

  That they their miserie know, ere it appeares?

  Let thy drifts sudden come; let men be blind

  T'wards future fate: oh let him hope that feares. {Pope+}

Ne utile quidem est scire quid futurum sit: Miserum est enim, nihil
profidentem angi:/3 It is not so much as profitable for us to know
what is to come, for it is a miserable thing, a man should fret and be
vexed, and do no good.' {fortune+} Yet is it of much lesse authoritie,
loe here, wherefore the example of Francis Marquis of Salum hath
seemed remarkable unto me: who being Lieutenant General unto Francis
our King, and over all his forces, which he then had beyond the
Mountaines in Italie, a man highly favoured in al our court, and
otherwise infinitly beholding to the King for that very, Marquisate,
which his brother had forfeited: and having no occasion to doe it, yea
and his minde and affections contradicting the same, buffered himselfe
to be frighted and deluded (as it hath since been manifestly prooved)
by the fond Prognostications which then throughout all Europe were
given out to the advantage of the Emperor Charles the fift and to our
prejudice in Italy, where these foolish predictions so much possesed
the Italians, that in Rome there were laid great wagers, and much
money given out upon the exchange, that we should utterly be
overthrowne) that after he had much condoled, yea and complained with
his secret friends, the unavoidable

----- LUCAN, 1. ii. 4.  Ib. 14.  CIC.  Nat.  Deor. 1. iii.

miseries which he foresaw prepared by the fates against the Crowne of
France, and the many friends he had there, he unkindly revolted, and
became a turne-cote on the Emperors side, to his intolerable losse and
destraction, notwithstanding all the constellations then reigning.
But be was drawne unto it as a man encompassed and beset by divers
passions; for having both strong castles, and-all maner of munition
and strength in his owne hands, the enemies armie under Antonio Leva
about three paces from him, and we nothing mistrusting him, it was in
his power to do worse than he did.  For notwithstanding his treason,
we lost neither man nor towne, except Fossan, which long after was by
us stoutly contested and defended.

  Prudens futuri temporis exitu

  Caliginosa nocte premit Deus

  Ridetque, si mortalis ultr

  Fas trepidat./1

  Our wise God hides in pitch-darke nigh

  Of future time th' event decreed

  And laughes at man, if man (affright

  Feare more than he to feare hath need.



  Ille potens su

  Laetqusue deget, cui licet in diem

  Dixisse, vixi, cras vel atr

  Nube polum pater occupato,

  Vel sole puro./2


  He of himselfe lives merily

  Who each day, I have liv'd, can say

  To morrow let God charge the skie

  With darke clouds, or faire sun-shine-ray.


  Laetus in praesens animus, quod ultra est,

  Oderit curare./3


  For present time a mery mind

  Hates to respect what is behind.


And those which take this word in a contrary sense are in the wrong.

  Ista sic reciprocantur ut et si divinatio sit dii sint, et si dii
  sint sit divinatio:/4

'This conse-

----- 1 HOR. 1. iii.  Od. xxix. 29. 2 Ib. 41. 3 HOR. 1. ii.
Od. xvi. 25. 4 CIC.  Div. 1. i. p.

quence is so reciprocall as if there be any divination, there are
Gods: and if there be Gods, there is divination.' Much more wisely
Pacuvius.  Nam istis linguam avium intelligunt Plusque ex alieno
jecoresapiunt, quam ex su Magis audiendum, quam auscultandum censio./1
Who understand what language birds expresse By their owne than
beasts-livers knowing lesse They may be heard, not hearkned to, I
guesse.

This so famous art of divination of the Tuskanes grew thus.  A
husband-man digging very deepe intothe ground saw Tages, a demy-God
appear out of it, with an infantine face, yet fraught with an age-like
wisdom.  All men ran to see him, and both his words and knowledgee
were for many ages after remembred, and collected, containing the
principles and meanes of this art.  An ofspring sutable to her
progresse.  I would rather direct affaires by the chance of dice, than
by such frivolous dreames.{Gloucester+} And truly in all
common-wealths, men have ever ascribed much authoritie unto lot.
Plato in the policie which he imagineth by discretion, ascribed the
deciding of many important effects unto it, and amongst other things
would have marriages betweene the good to bee contrived by lot.  And
giveth so large privileges unto this casuall election, that he
appoints the children proceeding from them to bee brought up in the
countrie; and those borne of the bad to be banished and sent abroad.
Notwithstanding if any of those so exiled shall by fortune happen,
whilest he is growing, to shew some good hope of himselfe, that he may
be revoked and sent-for backe, and such amongst the first as shall in
their youth give small hope of future good to be banished.  I see some
that studie, plod, and glosse their Almanackes, and in all accidents
alleage their authoritie.  A man were as good to say, they must needs
speake truth and lies.  Quis est enim qui totum diem

----- 1 CIC.  Div. 1. i. f.  Pac.

jaculans, non aliquando conlincet?/1 'For who is he that, shooting all
day, sometimes hits not the white?' I thinke not the better of them,
though what they say proove sometimes true.  It were more certaine, if
there were either a rule or a truth to lie ever.  Seeing no man
recordeth their fables, because they are ordinarie and infinit; and
their predictions are made to be of credit, because they are rare,
incredible and prodigious; so answered Diagoras surnamed the Atheist
(being in Samothrace) to him, who in shewing him diver's vowes and
offrings hanging in the Temple, brought thither by such as had escaped
shipwracke, said thus unto him: 'You that thinke the Gods to have no
care of humane things, what say you by so many men saved by their
grace and helpe?' 'Thus is it done,' answered he: 'Those which were
drowned farre exceeding their number, are not here set- forth.' Cicero
saith, That amongst all other Philosophers that have avowed and
acknowledged the Gods, onely Xenophanes the Colophonian hath gone
about to root out all maner of divination.  It is so much the lesse to
be wondred at, if at any time we have seene some of our Princes
mindes, to their great damage, relie upon such like vanities.  I would
to God, I had with mine owne eyes seene those two wonders, mentioned
in the booke of Ioachin the Abbat of Calabria, who foretold all the
Popes that should ensue, together with their names and shapes: And
that of Leo the Emperor, who fore-spake all the Emperors and
Patriarkes of Greece.  This have I seene with mine owne eyes, that in
publike confusions, men amazed at their owne fortune, give themselves
head-long, as it were to all maner of superstition, to search in
heaven the causes and ancient threats of their ill-lucke; and in my
time are so strangely successefull therein, as they have perswaded me,
that it is an ammusing of sharpe and idle wits; that such as are
inured to this subtletie, by folding and unfolding them, may in all
other writings be capable to finde out what they seeke-after.  But
above all,

----- 1 CIC.  Div. 1. ii.

their dark, ambiguous, fantasticall, and propheticall, gibrish, mends
the matter much, to which their authors never give a plaine sense,
that posterity may apply what meaning and construction it shall please
unto it.  The Daemon of Socrates was peradventure a certaine impulsion
or will, which without the advice of his discourse presented it selfe
unto him. In a minde so well purified, and by continuall exercise of
wisedome and vertue so wel prepared, as his was, it is likely, his
inclinations (though rash and inconsiderate) were ever of great
moment, and worthie to be followed. Every man feeleth in himselfe some
image of such agitations, of a prompt, vehement and casuall opinion.
It is in me to give them some authoritie, that affoord so little to
our wisedome.  And I have had some, equally weake in reason, and
violent in perswasion and disswasion (which was more ordinarie to
Socrates) by which I have so happily and so profitably suffred my
selfe to be transported, as they might perhaps be thought to containe
some matter of divine inspiration.

CHAPTER 1.XII+ OF CONSTANCIE

The law of resolution and constancie implieth not, we should not, as
much as lieth in our power shelter our selves from the chiefes and
inconveniences that threaten us, nor by consequence feare, they should
surprise us.  Contrariwise, all honest meanes for a man to warrant
himselfe from evils are not onely tolerable, but commendable.  And the
part of constancie is chiefly acted, in firmely bearing the
inconveniences, against which no remedie is to be found.  So that
there is no nimblenesse of bodie, nor wealding of hand-weapons, that
we will reject, if it may in any sort defend us from the blow, meant
at us.  Many most warlike nations in their conflicts and fights, used
retreating and flight as a principall advantage, and shewed their
backs to their enemie much more dangerously than their faces.  The
Turkes at this day retaine something of that humour.  And Socrates in
Plato doth mocke at Laches, because he had defined fortitude, to keepe
herselfe steadie in her rancke against her enemies; 'What,' saith hee,
'were it then cowardise to beat them in giving them place?' And
alleageth Homer against him, who commendeth in AEneas his skill in
flying and giving ground.  And because Laches being better advised,
avoweth that custome to be amongst the Scithians, and generally
amongst all horsemen, he alleageth further unto him the example of the
Lacedemonian footmen (a nation above all other used to fight on foot
who in the battell of Plateae, to open and to put to rowt the Persian
Phalanx, advised themselves to scatter and put themselves backe, that
so by the opinion of their flight, they might if they should pursue
them, rush in upon them, and put that so combined-masse to rout.  By
which meanes they gained the victorie.  Touching the Scithians, it is
reported, that when Darius went to subdue them, he sent their King
many reproachfull speeches, for so much as hee ever saw him retire and
give ground before him, and to avoid the maine battell.  To whom
Indathirsez (for so was his name) answered, that 'They did it not for
feare of him, nor any other man living, but that it was the fashion of
his nation to march thus: as having neither cities, nor houses, nor
manured land to defend, or to feare their enemies should reape any
commoditie by them.' But if hee had so great a desire to feed on them,
he might draw neerer to view the place of their ancient Sepulchers,
and there hee should meet with whom to speake his
belly-full. Notwithstanding when a man is once within reach of
cannonshot, and as it were point-blancke before them, as the fortune
of warre doth diverse times bring men unto, it ill beseemeth a
resolute minde to start- aside, or be daunted at the threat of a shot,
because by the violence and suddennesse thereof wee deeme it
inevitable: and there are some, who by lifting up of a hand, or
stooping their head have sometimes given their fellowes cause of
laughter: yet have we seeene in the voyage, the Emperour Charles the
fifth made against us in Provence, the Marquis of Guasto, being gone
out to survey the citie of Arles, and shewn himself out of a winde-
mill, under colour of which he was come somewhat neere the Towne, he
was discovered by the Lord of Bonevall, and the Seneshall of Agenois,
who were walking upon the Theatre Aux arenes (so called in French
because it is fall of sand) who shewing him to the Lord of Villiers,
Commissarie of the Artillerie, hee mounted a culverin so levell, that
had not the Marquis perceived the fire, and so started aside, it was
constantly affirmed, hee had beene shot through the body likewise not
many yeeres before, Lorence of Medici, Duke of Vrbin, and father to
the Queene-mother of France, besieging Mondolphe, a place in Italie,
in the province named Vicariate, seeing fire given to a piece that
stood upright upon him, stooped his head, and well befell him that he
plaide the duck, for otherwise the bullet, which wenr right over, and
within a little of his head, had doubtlesse shot him through the
paunch.  But to say truth, I will never thinke these motions were made
with discourse, for what judgement can you give of an aime, either
high or low, in a matter so sudden?  It may rather be thought that
fortune favoured their feare: and which an other time might as well
bee a meane to make them fall into the cannons-mouth, as to avoid the
same.  I cannot chuse, if the cracke of a musket doe suddenly streeke
mine eares, in a place where I least looke for it, but I must needs
start at it: which I have seene happen to men of better sort than
myselfe.  Nor doe the Stoickes meane, that the Soule of their wisest
man in any sort resist the first visions and sudden fantasies, that
surprise the same: but rather consent that, as it were unto a naturall
subjection, he yeelds and shrinks unto the loud clattering and roare
of heaven, or of some violent downefall; for example-sake, unto
palenesse, and contraction.  So likewise in other passions, alwayes
provided, his opinion remaines safe and whole, and the situation of
his reason+, admit no tainting or alteration whatsoever: and hee no
whit consent to his fright and sufferance.  Touching the first part;
the same hapneth to him, that is not wise, but farre otherwise
concerning the second.  For the impression of passions doth not
remaine superficiall in him: but rather penetrates even into the
secret of reason, infecting and corrupting the same.  He judgeth
according to them and conformeth himselfe to them.  Consider precisely
the state of the wise Stoicke: Mens immota manet, lachrymae volvuntur
inanes./1

  His minde doth firme remaine,

  Teares are distill'd in vaine.

  the wise Peripatetike doth not exempt himselfe from perturbations of
  the mind, but doth moderate them.

----- 1 VIRG.  AEn. 1. iv. 449.

CHAPTER 1.XIII+ OF CEREMONIES IN THE ENTERVIEW OF KINGS

THERE is no subject so vaine, that deserveth not a place in this
rapsodie. It were a notable discourtesie unto our common rules, both
towards an equall, but more toward a great person, not to meete with
you in your house, if he have once warned you that he will come: And
Margaret Queene of Navarre, was wont to say to this purpose, 'That it
was a kinde of incivilitie in a gentleman, to depart from his house,
as the fashion is, to meet with him that is comming to him, how worthy
soever he be: and that it more agreeth with civilitie and respect, to
stay for him at home, and there to entertain him: except it were for
feare the stranger should misse his way: and that it sufficeth to
companie and wait upon him, when he is going away again.' As for me, I
oftentimes forget these vaine offices; as one that endevoureth to
abolish all maner of ceremonies+ in my house.  Some will bee offended
at it, what can I doe withall?  I had rather offend a stranger once,
than my selfe everie day; for it were a continuall subjection.  To
what end doe men avoid the servitude of Courts, and entertaine the
same in their owne houses?  Moreover it is a common rule in all
assemblies, that hee who is the meaner man, commeth first to the place
appointed, forsomuch as it belongs to the better man to be staid-for
and waited upon by the other.  Neverthelesse we saw that at the
enterview, prepared at Merceilles betweene Pope Clement the seventh,
and Francis the first, King of France, the King having appointed all
necessarie preparation, went him-selfe out of the Towne, and gave the
Pope two or three dayes leasure, to make his entrie into it, and to
refresh himselfe, before he would come to meet him there.  Likewise at
the meeting of the said Pope with the Emperour at Bologna, the
Emperour gave the Pope advantage and leasure to be first there, and
afterward came himselfe.  It is (say they) an ordinarie ceremonie at
enter-parlies betweene such Princes, that the better man should ever
come first to the place appointed yea before him in whose countrey the
assembly is and they take it in this sence, that it is, because this
complement should testifie, he is the better man, whom the meaner
goeth to seeke, and that hee sueth unto him.  Not onely each countrey,
but every Citie, yea, and every vocation hath his owne particular
decorum+{sprezzatura+} I have very carefully beene brought up in mine
infancie, and have lived in verie good company, because I would not
bee ignorant of the good maners of our countrey of France, and I am
perswaded I might keepe a schoole of them.  I love to follow them, but
not so cowardly, as my life remaine thereby in subjection.  They have
some painfull formes in them, which if a man forget by discretion, and
not by errour, hee shall no whit bee disgraced.  I have often seene
men proove unmanerly by too much maners, and importunate by over-much
courtesie+.  The knowledge of entertainment is otherwise a profitable
knowledge.  It is, as grace+ and beautie are, the reconciler of the
first accoastings of society and familiarity: and by consequence, it
openeth the entrance to instruct us by the example of others, and to
exploit and produce our example, if it have any instructing or
communicable thing in it.

CHAPTER 1.XIV+ MEN ARE PUNISHED BY TO MUCH OPINIONATING THEMSELVES IN
A PLACE WITHOUT REASON

VALOUR hath his limits, as other vertues have: which if a man out-go,
hee shall find himselfe in the traine of vice: in such sort, that
unlesse a man know their right bounds, which in truth are not on a
sudden easily hit upon, he may fall into rashnesse, obstinacie and
folly.  For this consideration grew the custome wee hold in warres, to
punish, and that with death, those who wilfully opiniate themselves to
defend a place, which by the rules of warre cannot be kept.  Otherwise
upon hope of impunitie, there should bee no cottage that might not
entertaine an Armie.  The Lord Constable Momorancie at the siege of
Pavia, having beene appointed to passe over the river Tesine, and to
quarter himselfe in the suburbs of Saint Antonie, being impeached by a
tower that stood at the end of the bridge. and which obstinately would
needs hold out, yea and to be battered, caused all those that were
with-in it, to be hanged.  The same man afterward, accompanying my
Lord the Dolphin of France in his iourney beyond the Alpes, having by
force taken the Castle Villane, and all those that were within the
same, having by the furie of the Souldiers bin put to the sword,
except the Captaine, and his Ancient, for the same reason, caused them
both to be hanged and strangled: As did also Captaine Martin du
Bellay, the Governour of Turin, in the same conntrey, the Captaine of
Saint Bony: all the rest of his men having beene massacred at the
taking of the place.  But forsomuch as the judgement of the strength
or weaknesse of the place is taken by the estimate and counterpoise of
the forces that assaile it (for som might justly opinionate himselfe
against two culverins, that wold play the mad-man to expect thirtie
cannons) where also the greatnesse of the Prince conquering must be
considered, his reputation, and the rest that is due unto him: there
is danger a man should somewhat bend the balance on that side.  By
which termes it hapneth, that some have so great an opinion of
themselves, and their meanes, and deeming it unreasonable, anything
should be worthie to make head against them, that so long as their
fortune continueth, they overpasse what hill or difficultie soever
they finde to withstand or resist them: As is seene by the formes of
sommonings and challenges, that the Princes of the East, and their
successors yet remaining, have in use, so fierce, so haughtie and so
full of a barbarous kinde of commandement.  And in those places where
the Portugales abated the pride of the Indians, they found some states
observing this universall and inviolalile law, that what enemie soever
he be, that is overcome by the King in person, or by his Lieutenant,
is exempted from all composition of ransome or mercie.  So above all,
a man who is able should take heed, lest he fall into the hands of an
enemie-judge, that is victorious and armed.

CHAPTER 1.XV+ OF THE PUNISHMENT OF COWARDISE

I HAVE heretofore heard a Prince, who was a very great Captaine, hold
opinion, that a souldier might not for cowardise of heart be condemned
to death: who, sitting at his table heard report of the Lord of
Vervins' sentence, who for yeelding up of Bollein, was doomed to lose
his head. Verily there is reason a man should make a difference
between faults proceeding from our weaknesses and those that grow from
our malice.  For in the latter we are directly bandied against the
rules of reason, which nature hath imprinted in us; and in the former,
it seemeth, we may call the same nature, as a warrant, because it hath
left us in such imperfection and defect. So as divers nations have
judged that no man should blame us for anything we doe against our
conscience.  And the opinion of those which condemne heretikes and
miscreants unto capitall punishments, is partly grounded upon this
rule: and the same which establisheth, that a Judge or an Advocate may
not bee called to account for any matter, committed in their charge
through oversight or ignorance.  But touching cowardise, it is certain
the common fashion is, to punish the same with ignominie and shame.
And some hold that this rule was first put in practice by the
Law-giver Charondas, and that before him the lawes of Greece were wont
to punish those with death, who for feare did run away from a Battell:
where hee onely ordained, that for three dayes together, clad in
womens attire, they should be made to sit in the market-place: hoping
yet to have some service at their hands, and by meanes of this
reproch, they might recover their courage againe.  Suffundere malis
hominis sanguinem quam effundere: 'Rather move a man's bloud to blush
in his face, than remove it by bleeding from his body.' It appeareth
also that the Roman lawes did in former times punish such as had run
away by death.  For Ammius Marcellinus reporteth, that Iulian the
Emperor condemned ten of his Souliliers, who in a charge against the
Parthians, had but turned their backs from it; first to be degraded,
then to suffer death, as he saith, according to the ancient lawes, who
neverthelesse, condemneth others for a like fault, under the ensigne
of bag and baggage, to be kept amongst the common prisoners.  The
sharp punishment of the Romans against those Souldiers that escaped
from Cannae: and in the same warre against those that accompanied Cn.
Fulvius in his defeat, reached not unto death, yet may a man feare,
such open shame may make them despaire, and not only prove faint and
cold friends, but cruell and sharpe enemies.  In the time of our
forefathers, the Lord of Franget, whilom Lieutenant of the Marshall of
Chastillions company, having by the Marshall of Chabanes beene placed
Governor of Fontarabie, in stead of the Earle of Lude and having
yeelded the same unto the Spaniards, was condemned to be degraded of
all Nobilitie, and not onely himselfe, but all his succeeding
posteritie declared villains and clownes, taxable and incapable to
beare armes; which severe sentence was put in execution at Lyons.  The
like punishment did afterward all the Gentlemen suffer, that were
within Guise, when the Earle of Nansaw enired the towne: and others
since.  Neverthelesse if there were so grosse an ignorance, and so
apparent cowardize, as that it should exceed all ordinary, it were
reason it should be taken for a sufficient proofe of inexcusable
treacherier and knaverie, and for such to be punished.

CHAPTER 1.XVI+ A TRICKE OF CERTAINE AMBASSADORS

IN all my travels I did ever observe this custome, that is, alwaies to
learne something by the communication of others (which is one of the
best schooles that may be) to reduce those I confer withall to speake
of that wherein they are most conversant and skilfull

  Basti al nocchiero ragionar de' venti

  Al bifolco de' tori, e le sue piagh

  Conti 'l guerrier, conti 'l pastor gli armenti.


  Sailers of windes plow-men of beasts take keepe

  Let Souldiers count their woundes, shepherds their sheepe.

For commonly we see the contrary, that many chuse rather to discourse
of any other trade than their owne; supposing it to be so much new
reputation gotten: witnes the quip Archidamus gave Periander, saying
that he forsooke the credit of a good Physitian, to become a paltry
Poet.  Note but how Caesar displaieth his inventiton at large, when he
would have us conceive his inventions how to build bridges, and
devices, how to frame other war-like engins; and in respect of that
how close and succinct he writes, when he speaketh of the offices
belonging to his profession, of his valour, and of the conduct of his
war-fare.  His exploits prove him a most excellent Captaine, but he
would be known for a skilfull Ingenier, a quality somewhat strange in
him.  Dionysius the elder was a very great chieftaine and Leader in
warre, as a thing best fitting his fortune; but be greatly laboured by
meanes of Poetry, to assume high commendation unto himselfe, howbeit
he had but little skill in it.  A certaine Lawier was not long since
brought to see a study, stored with all manner of bookes, both of his
owne, and of all other faculties, wherein he found no occasion to
entertaine himselfe withal, but like a fond cunning clarke earnestly
busied himselfe to glosse and censure a fence or a barricado, placed
over the screw of the study, which a hundred Captaines and Souldiers
see everie day, without obsererving or taking offence at them.

  Optat ephippia bos piger, optat arare caballus./1


  The Oxe would trappings weare

  The Horse, ploughs--yoake would beare.

By this course you never come to perfection, or bring any thing to
good passe.  Thus must a man endevour to induce the Architect, the
Painter, the Shoemaker, to speake of their owne trade, and so of the
rest, every man in his vocation.  And to this purpose am I wont, in
reading of histories (which is the subject of most men) to consider
who are the writers: If they be such as professe nothing but bare
learning, the chiefe thing I learne in them, is their stile and
language: if Physitians, I beleeve them in whatsoever they shall
report concerning the temperatenesse of the aire, the health and
complexion of Princes, or of hurts and infirmities: If Lawiers, we
should observe the controversies of rights, titles, and pretenses of
lawes and customes, the establishment of policies, and such like
things: If Divines, we may note the affaires of the Church, the
Ecclesiasticall censures, dispensations, cases of conscience, and
marriages: If Courtiers, manners, complements, ceremonies, and
entertainments: If Warriors, what belongs unto their charge, but
chiefly the managing and conduct of the atchievements or exploits
wherein they have been themselves in person: If Ambassadors, the
negotiations, intelligences, practices, policies, and manner how to
direct, complot, and conduct them.  And therefore what in another
Writer I should peradventure have cursorie passed over, I have with
some advisednesse

----- 1 HOR.1.i.Epist. xiv. 43.

considered and marked the same in the historie of the Lord of Langley,
a man most expert and intelligent in such matters: which is, that
after he had exactly set downe and declared those glorious, and
farre-fetcht remonstrances of the Emperor Charles the fifth made in
the consistorie of Rome, in the presence of the Bishop of Mascon, and
the Lord of Velly, our Ambassadors; wherein he entermixed many bitter
and outrageous words against us; and amongst others, that if his
Captaines and Souldiers were not of much more faithfulnesse and
sufficiencie in the art of warre than our Kings, he would forthwith
tie a rope about his necke, and goe aske him mercy: whereof he seemed
to beleeve something: for afterward whilest he lived, he chanced twice
or thrice to utter the verie same words.  Moreover, that he had
challenged the King to fight with him, man to man in his shirt, with
Rapier and dagger in a boat.  The said Lord of Langey, following his
storie addeth that the said Ambassadors making a dispatch of what had
passed unto the King, dissembled the chiefest part unto him, yea and
concealed the two precedent articles from him.  Now me thought it very
strange, that it should lie in the power of an Ambassador to dispence
with any point, concerning the advertizements he should give unto his
Master, namely of such consequence, comming from such a person, and
spoken in so great an assembly, whereas me seemed it should have beene
the office of a trustie servant, truly and exactly to set downe thin
as they were, and in what manner they had succeeded: to the end the
libertie of disposing, judging and chusing, might wholly lie in the
master.  For to alter and conceale the truth from him, for feare he
should conster and take it other than he ought, and lest that might
provoke him to some had resolution; and in the meanewhile to suffer
him to be ignorant of his owne affaires, mee thought should rather
have appertained to him that giveth the law, than to him that
receiveth the same; the Master or overseer of the schools, and not to
him who should thinke himselfe inferior, as well in authority as in
wisdome and good_counsell+.  Howsoever it were, I would be loth be so
used in mine owne small and particular businesse, we do so willingly
upon every slight occasion and pretence neglect and forgoe
commandement, and are so farre from obeying, that we rather usurp a
kinde of mastery and free power: every man doth REDO 63 On the other
side a man might also consider, that this so strict obedience belongs
but to precise and prefixed commandements. Ambassadors have a more
scopefull and free charge, which in many points dependeth chiefly of
their disposition.  They doe not meerely execute, but frame and direct
by their owne advice+ and counsell, the will of their Master.  I have
in dayes seene some persons of commandement, checked and found fault
withall, because they had rather obeyed the literall sense, and bare
words of the Kings letters, than the occasions of the affaires they
had in hand.  Men of understanding and experience doe yet at this daye
condemne the custome of the Kings of Persia, which was to mince the
instructions given to their Agents, and Lieutenants so small, that in
the least accident they might have recourse to their directions and
ordinainces: This delay, in so farre reaching a scope of domination,
having often brought great prejudice, and notable dammage unto their
affaires.  And Crassus writing unto a man of that profession and
advertizing him of the use whereto he purposed the foresaid mast;
seemeth he not to enter into conference with him concerning his
determination, and wish him to interpose his censure or advice of it.

CHAPTER 1.XVII+ OF FEARE

  Obstupui, steteruntque comae, et vox faucibus haesit./1


  I stood agast, my haire on end

  My jaw-tide tongue no speech would lead.

I AM no good Naturalist (as they say and I know not well by what
springs feare doth worke in us: but well I wot it is a strange
passion: and as Physitians say, there is none doth sooner transport
our judgement out of his due seat.  Verily I have seene divers become
mad and senselesse for feare: yea and in him, who is most settled and
best resolved, it is certaine that whilest his fit continueth, it
begetteth many strange dazelings, and terrible amazements in him.  I
omit to speake of the vulgar sort, to whom it sometimes representeth
strange apparitions, as their fathers and grandfathers ghosts, risen
out of their graves, and in their winding sheets: and to others it
sometimes sheweth Larves, Hobgoblins, Robbin-good-fellowes, and such
other Bugbeares and Chimeraes.  But even amongst Souldiers, with whom
it ought to have no credit at all, how often hath she changed a flocke
of sheep into a troupe of armed men?  Bushes and shrubs into men
at-armes and officiers? our friends into our enemies? and a red crosse
into a white? At what time the Duke of Bourbon tooke Rome, an Ancient
that kept sentinell in the borough Saint Peter, was at the first
alarum surprised with such terror, that with his colours in his hand
he suddenly threw himselfe thorow the hole of a breach out of the
Citie, and just in the midst of his

----- 1 VIRG.  AEn. 1. ii. 774.

enemies, supposing the way to goe straight in the heart of the Citie:
but in the end he no sooner perceived the Duke of Bourbons troupes
advancing to withstand him, imagining it to bee some sallie the
Citizens made that way, hee better bethinking himselfe, turned head,
and the very same way he came out, he went into the towne againe,
which was more than three hundred paces distance towards the fields.
The like happened, but not so successfully, unto Captaine Iulle his
ensigne-bearer at what time Saint Paul was taken from us by the Earle
of Bures, and the Lord of Reu, who was so frighted with feare, that
going about to cast himselfe over the towne wals, with his Ancient in
his hand, or to creepe thorow a spike-hole, he was cut in peeces by
the assailants.  At which siege likewise, that horror and feare is
very memorable, which so did cboake, seize upon, and freeze the heart
of a gentleman, that having received no hurt at all, he fell downe
starke dead upon the ground before the breach.  The like passion rage
doth sometimes possesse a whole multitude.  In one of the encounters
that Germanicus had with the Germanes, two mightie troupes were at one
instant so frighted with feare, that both betooke themselves to their
heeles, and ran away two contrary wayes, the one right to that place
whence the other fled. It sometimes addeth wings unto our heeles, as
unto the first named, and other times it takes the use of feet from
us: as we may reade of Theophilus the Emperor, who in a battell hee
lost against the Agarens, was so amazed and agonied, that he could not
resolve to scape away by flight: adeo pavor etiam auxilia formidat;/1
'Feare is so afraid even of that should help;' Untill such time as
Manuel, one of the chiefe leaders in his armie, having rouzed and
shaken him, as it were out of a dead sleepe, said unto him, 'Sir, if
you will not presently follow me, I will surely kill you, for better
were it you should lose your life, than being taken prisoner, lose
your Empire and all.' Then doth she shew the utmost of her power, when
for her owne service, she calls us off unto valour,

----- 1 QUINT.  Curt. 1. iii. c. 1 l.

which it hath exacted from our duty and honor.  In the first set
battell, the Romans lost against Hanibal, under the Consul Sempronius,
a troupe of wel-nigh ten thousand footmen was so surprised with feare,
that seeing no other way to take, nor by what other course to give
their basenes free passage, they headlong bent their flight toward the
thickest and strongest squadron of their enemies, which with such
furie it rowted and slew a great number of the Carthaginians :
purchasing a reproachfull and disgraceful flight, at the same rate it
might have gained a most glorious victorie. It is feare I stand most
in feare of.  For, in sharpnesse it surmounteth all other accidents.
What affecfion can be more violent and just than that of Pompeyes
friends, who in his owne ship were spectators of that horrible
massacre? yet is it, that the feare of the AEgyptian sailes, which
began to approach them, did in such sort daunt and skare them, that
some have noted, they only busied themselves to hasten the marriners
to make what speed they could and by maine strength of oares to save
themselves, untill such time, as being arrived at Tyre, and that they
were free from feare, they had leasure to bethinke themselves of their
late losse, and give their plaints and teares free passage, which this
other stronger passion had suspended and hindred.

  Tum pavor sapientiam omnem mihi ex animo expectorat./1

  Feare then unbreasts all wit,

  That in my minde did sit.

Those who in any skirmish or sudden bickering of warre have been
throughly skared, fore-hurt, wounded, and gored as they be, are many
times the next day after brought to charge againe.  But such as have
conceived a true feare of their enemies, it is hard for you to make
them looke them in the face againe.  Such as are in continuall feare
to lose their goods, to be banished, or to be subdued, live in
uncessant agonie

----- 1 CIC.  Tusc.  Qu. 1. iv. ex Enn.; De Orat. 1. iii.

and languor; and thereby often lose both their drinking, their eating,
and their rest.  Whereas the poore, the banished, and seely servants,
live often as carelesly and as pleasantly as the other.  And so many
men, who by the impatience and urging of feare, have hanged, drowned,
and headlong tumbled downe from some rocke, have plainly taught us,
that feare is more importunate and intolerable than death.  The
Graecians acknowledge another kinde of it, which is beyond the error
of our discourse: proceeding, as they say without any apparent cause,
and from an heavenly impulsion.  Whole Nations and Armies are often
seene surprised with it.  Such was that which brought so wonderfull a
desolation to Carthage, where nothing was heard but lamentable
out-cries and frightfull exclamations: the inhabitants were seene
desperately to runne out of their houses, as to a sudden alarum, and
furiously to charge, hurt, and enter-kill one another, as if they had
beene enemies come to usurpe and possesse their Citie.  All things
were there in a disordered confusion, and in a confused furie, until
such time as by praiers and sacrifices they had appeased the wrath of
their Gods. They call it to this day, the Panike terror./1

----- 1 ERAS.  Chil. ii. cent. x. ad. 19; Chil. iii, cent. vii. ad. 3.
DIOD. Sic. 1. xv. c. 7.


CHAPTER 1.XVIII+ THAT WE SHOULD NOT JUDGE OF OUR HAPPINESSE UNTILL
AFTER OUR DEATH


       ----- scilicet ultima sempe Expectnda dies homini est, dicique
beatu

Ante obitum nemo, supremaquefunera debet./1 We must expect of man the
latest da Nor ere he die, he's happie, can we say.  THE very children
are acquainted with the storie of Croesus to this purpose: who being
taken by Cyrus, and by him condemned to die, upon the point of his
execution, cried out aloud: 'Oh Solon, Solon!' which words of his,
being reported to Cyrus; who inquirug what be meant by them, told him,
hee now at his owne cost verified the advertisement Solon had before
times given him; which was, that no man, what cbeerefull and
blandishing countenance soever fortune+ shewed them may rightly deeme
himselfe happie, till such time as he have passed the last day of his
life, by reason of the uncertaintie and vicissitude of humane things,
which by a very light motive, and slight occasion, are often changed
from one to another cleane contrary state and degree.  And therefore
Agesilaus answered one that counted the King of Persia happy, because
being very young the garland of so mightie and great a dominion: 'yea
but said he, Priam at the same age was not unhappy.' Of the Kings of
Macedon that succeeded Alexander the Great, some were afterward seene
to become Joyners and Scriveners at Rome: and of Tyrants of Sicilie,
School-masters at

----- OVID.  Met. 1. iii. 135.

Corinth.  One that had conquered halfe the world, and been Emperour
over so many Armies, became an humble and miserable suter to the
raskally officers of a king of AEgypte: At so high a rate did that
great Pompey purchase the irkesome prolonging of his life but for five
or six moneths.  And in our fathers daies, Lodowicke Sforze, tenth
Duke of Millane under whom the State of Italie had so long beene
turmoiled and shaken, was seene to die a wretched prisoner at Loches
in France, but not till he had lived and lingered ten yeares in
thraldom, which was the worst of his bargaine.  The fairest Queene,
wife to the greatest King of Christendome, was she not lately mene to
die by the hands of an executioner?  Oh unworthie and barbarous
crueltie!  And a thousand such examples.  For, it seemeth that as the
sea-billowes and surging waves, rage and storme against the Burly
pride and stubborne height of our buildings, so are there above,
certaine spirits that envie the rising prosperities and greatneme
heere below.

  Vsque adeo res humanas vis abdita quaeda

  Obterit, et pulchros fasces saevasque secure

  Proculcare, ac ludibrio sibi habere videtur./1


  A hidden power so mens states hath out-worn

  Faire swords, fierce scepters, signes of honours borne,

  It seemes to trample and deride in scorne.


And it seemeth Fortune doth sometimes narrowly watch the last day of
our life, thereby to shew her power, and in one moment to overthrow
what for many yeares together she had been erecting, and makes us cry
after Laberius, Nimirum hac die undi plus vixi, mihi quam vivendum
fuit./2 Thus it is, 'I have lived longer by this one day than I
should.' {Lear+} So may that good advice of Solon be taken with
reason.  But forsomuch as he is a Philosopher, with whom the favours
or disfavours of fortune, and good or in lucke have no place, and are
not regarded by him; and puissances and greatnesses, and accidents of
qualitie, are well-nigh

----- 1 LUCRET. 1. v. 1243. 2 MACROB. 1. ii. c. 7.

indifferent: I deeme it very likely he had a further reach, and meant
that the same good fortune of our life, which dependeth of the
tranquillitie and contentment of a welborne minde, and of the
resolution and assurance of a well ordered soule, should never be
ascribed unto man, untill he have beene seene play the last act of his
comedie and without doubt the hardest. In all the rest there may be
some maske: either these sophisticall discourses of Philosophie are
not in us bat by countenance, or accidents that never touch us to the
quick, give us alwaies leasure to keep our countenance setled.  But
when that last part, of death, and of our selves comes to be acted,
when no dissembling will availe, then is it high time to
speakeplaine_English+, and put off all vizards: then whatsoever the
pot containeth must be shewne, be it good or had, foule or cleane,
wine or water.

  Nam verae voces tum demum pectore ab im

  Ejiciuntur, et eripitur persona, manet res./1


  For then are sent true speeches from the heart,

  We are ourselves, we leave to play a part.

Loe heere, why at this last cast, all our lives other actions must be
tride and touched.  It is the masterday, the day that judgeth all
others: it is the day, saith an auncient Writer, that must judge of
all my forepassed yeares, To death doe I referre the essay of my
studies fruit.  There shall wee see whether my discourse proceed from
my heart, or from my mouth.  I have seene divers, by their death,
either in good or evill, give reputation to all their forepassed life.
Scipio, father-in-law to Pompey, in well dying, repaired the ill
opinion which untill that houre men had ever held of him.  Epaminondas
being demanded which of the three he esteemed most, either Chabrias,
or Iphicrates, or himselfe: 'It is necessary,' said he, "that we be
seene to die, before your question may well be resolved.' Verily, we
should steale much from him, if he

----- 1 LUCRET. 1. iii 57.

should be weighed without the honour and greatnesse of his
end. {Prospero+} God hath willed it, as he pleased: but in my time
three of the most execrable persons that ever I knew in all
abomination of life, and the most infamous have beene seene to die
very orderly and quietly, and in every circumstance composed even unto
perfection.  There are some brave and fortunate deaths. I have seene
her cut the twine of some man's life, with a progresse of wonderful
advancement, and with so worthie an end, even in the flowre of his
growth and spring of his youth, that in mine opinion, his ambitious
and haughty couragious designes, thought nothing so high as might
interrupt them: who without going to the place where he pretended ,
arived there more gloriously and worthily than either his desire or
hope aimed at, and by his fall forewent the power and name whither by
his course he aspired. When I judge of other men's lives, I ever
respect how they have behaved themselves in their end; and my chiefest
study is, I may well demeane myselfe at my last gaspe, that is to say,
quietly and constantly.

CHAPTER 1.XIX+ THAT TO PHILOSOPHIZE IS TO LEARNE HOW TO DIE

CICERO saith, that to Philosophise is no other thing than for a man to
prepare himselfe to death: which is the reason that studie and
contemplation doth in some sort withdraw our soule from us and
severally employ it from the body, which is a kind of apprentisage and
resemblance of death; or else it is, that all the wisdome and
discourse of the world, doth in the end resolve upon this point, to
teach us not to feare to die.  Truly either reason mockes us, or it
only aimeth at our contentment, and in fine, bends all her travell to
make us live well, and as the holy Scripture, saith, 'at our ease.'
All the opinions of the world conclude, that pleasure is our end,
howbeit they take divers meanes unto and for it, else would men reject
them at their first comming.  For, who would give eare unto him, that
for it's end would establish our paine and disturbance?  The
dissentions of philosophicall sects in this case are verbal:
Transcurramus solertissimas nugas;/1 'Let us run over such over-fine
fooleries and subtill trifles.' There is more wilfulnesse and
wrangling among them, than pains to a sacred profession.  But what
person a man undertakes to act, he doth ever therewithal personate his
owne.  Allthough they say, that in vertue it selfe, the last scope of
our aime is voluptuousnes.  It pleaseth me to importune their eares
still with this word, which so much offends their bearing.  And if it
imply any chief pleasure or exceeding contentment, it is rather due to
the assistance of vertue, than to any

----- 1.  SEN.  Epist. 117.

other supply, voluptuousnes being more strong, sinnowie, sturdie. and
     manly, is but more seriously voluptuous.  And we should give it
     the name of pleasure, more favorable, sweeter, and more naturall;
     and not terme it vigor, from which it hath his denomination.
     Should this baser sensuality deserve this faire name, it should
     be by competencie and not by privilege.  I finde it lesse void of
     incommodities and crosses than vertue.  And besides that, her
     taste is more fleeting,. momentarie, and fading, she hath her
     fasts, her eves and her travels, and both sweat and bloud.
     Furthermore she hath particularly so many wounding passions, and
     of so severall sorts, and so filthie and loathsome a societie
     waiting upon her, that shee is equivalent to penitencie.  Wee are
     in the wrong, to thinke her incommodities serve her as a
     provocation and seasoning to her sweetues, as in nature one
     contrarie is vivified by another contrarie: and to say, when we
     come to vertue, that like succeses and difficulties overwhelme
     it, and yeeld it austere and inaccessible.  Whereasmuch more
     properly then unto voluptuousness they ennobled sharpen, animate,
     and raise that divine and perfecte pleasure which it meditates
     and procureth us.  Truly he is verie unworthie her acquaintance,
     that counter- ballanceth her cost to his friut, and knowes
     neither the graces nor use of it.  Those who go about to instruct
     us, how her pursuit is very hard and laborious, and her iovisance
     well-pleasing and delightfull: what else tell they us, but that
     shee is ever unpleasant and irksome?  For, what humane meane did
     ever attaine unto an absolute enjoying of it?  The perfectest
     have beene content but to aspire and approach her, without ever
     possessing her.  But they are deceived; seeing that of all the
     pleasures we know, the pursute of them is pleasant.  The
     enterprise is perceived by the qualitie of the thing, which it
     hath regard unto: for it is a good portion of the effect, and
     consubstantiall.  That happines and felicitie which shineth in
     vertue, replenishet her approaches and appurtenances, even unto
     the first entrance and utmost barre.  Now of all the benefits of
     vertue, the contempt of the contempt of death is the chiefest, a
     meane that furnisheth our life with an ease-full tranquillitie
     and gives us a pure and amiable taste of it: without which every
     other voluptuousnes is extinguished.  Loe, here the reasons why
     and all rules encounter and agree with this article.  And albeit
     they all leade us with a common accord to despise grife,
     povertie, and other accidentall crosses, to which man's life is
     subject, it is not with an equall care: as well because accidents
     are not of such a necessitie for most men passe their whole life
     without feeling any want or povertier and othersome without
     feeling any griefe or sicknes, as Xenophilus the Musitian, who
     lived an hundred and six yeares in perfect and continuall health:
     as also if the worst happen, death may at all times, and
     whensoever it shall please us, cut off all other inconveniences
     and crosses.  But as for death, it is inevitable.

  Omnes eodem cogimur, omniu

  Versatur urna, serius, ociu

  Sors exitura, et nos in aeternu

  Exilium impositura cymbae/1


  All to one place are driv'n, of al

  Shak't is the lot-pot, where-hence shal

  Sooner or later drawns lots fall

  And to deaths boat for aye enthrall.


And by consequence, if she makes us affeard, it is a continual subject
of torment, and which can no way be eased.  There is no starting-hole
will hide us from her, she will finde us wheresoever we are, we may as
in a suspected countrie start and turne here and there: guae quasi
saxum Tantalo semper impendet/2 'Which evermore hangs like the stone
over the head of Tantalus:' Our lawes doe often condemne and send
malefactors to be executed in the same place where the crime was
committed: to which whilest they are going, leade them along the
fairest houses, or entertaine them with the best cheere you can,

----- 1 HOR. l. iii.  Od. iii. 25.  Cic.  De Fin. 1. i

             non Siculae dape

  Dulcem elaborabunt saporem

  Non avium, citharaeque cantu

  Somnum reducent./1


  Not all King Denys daintie fare,

  Can pleasing taste for them prepare

  No song of birds, no musikes sound

  Can lullabie to sleepe profound.

Doe you thinke they can take any pleasure in it? or be any thing
delighted? and that the finall intent of their voiage being still
before their eies, hath not altered and altogether distracted their
taste from all these commodities and allurements?

  Audit iter, numeratgue dies, spatioque viarum

  Metitur vitam, torquetur peste futura./2


  He heares his journey, counts his daies, so measures h

  His life by his waies length, vext with the ill shall be.

The end of our cariere is death, it is the necessarie object of our
aime: if it affright us, how is it possible we should step one foot
forther without an ague?  The remedie of the vulgar sort is, not to
think on it.  But from what brutall stupiditie may so grosse a
blindnesse come upon him? he must be made to bridle his Asse by the
taile,

  Qui capite ipse suo instituit vestigia retro./3


  Who doth a course contrarie runne

   With his head to his course begunne.

     It is no marvell if he be so often taken tripping some doe no
     sooner heare the name of death spoken of, but they are afraid,
     yea the most part will crosse themselves, as if they heard the
     Devill named.  And because mention is made of it in mens wills
     and testaments, I warrant you there is none will set his hand to
     them, til the physitian hath given his last doome, and utterly
     forsaken him.  And God knowes, being then betweene

----- 1 HOR. 1. iii.  Od. i. 12. 2 CLAUD. in Ruff. 1. ii. i. 137. 3
LUCRET. 1. iv. 474.

such paine and feare, with what sound judgment they endure him.  For
so much as this syllable sounded so unpleasantly in their eares, and
this voice seemed so ill-boding and unluckie, the Romans had learned
to allay and dilate the name by a Periphasis.  In liew of saying, he
is dead, or he hath ended his daies, they would say, he hath lived.
So it be life, be it past or no, they are comforted: from whom we have
borrowed our phrases quondam, alias, or late such a one.  It may haply
be, as the common saying is, the time we live is worth the money we
pay for it.  I was borne betweene eleven of the clocke and noone, the
last of Februarie 1533, according to our computation, the yeare
beginning the first of Januarie.  It is but a fortnight since I was 39
yeares old.  I want at least as much more.  If in the meane time I
should trouble my thoughts with a matter so farre from me, it were but
folly.  But what? we see both young and old to leave their life after
one selfe-same condition.  No man departs otherwise from it, than if
he but now came to it, seeing there is no man so crazed, bedrell, or
decrepit, so long as he remembers Methusalem, but thinkes he may yet
live twentie yeares.  Moreover, seely creature as thou art, who hath
limited the end of thy daies?  Happily thou presumest upon physitians
reports.  Rather consider the effect and experience.  By the common
course of things long since thou livest by extraordinarie favour.
Thou hast alreadie over-past the ordinarie tearmes of common life: And
to prove it, remember but thy acquaintances, and tell me how many more
of them have died before they came to thy age, than have either
attained or outgone the same: yea, and of those that through renoune
have ennobled their life, if thou but register them, I will lay a
wager, I will finde more that have died before they came to five and
thirty years, than after. {usthem+} It is consonant with reason and
pietie, to take example by the humanity of Jesus Christ, who ended his
humane life at three and thirtie yeares.  The greatest man that ever
was being no more than a man, I meane Alexander the Great, ended his
dayes, and died also of that age.  How many severall meanes and waies
hath death to surprise us!

  Quid quisque vitet, nunquam homini satis

  Cautum est in horas./1


  A man can never take good heed

  Hourely what he may shun and speed.

I omit to speak of agues and pleurisies; who would ever have imagined
that a Duke of Brittanie should have beene stifled to death in a
throng of people, as whilome was a neighbour of mine at Lyons, when
Pope Clement made his entrance there?  Hast thou not seene one of our
late Kings slaine in the middest of his sports? and one of his
ancestors die miserably by the chocke of an hog?  Eschilus
fore-threatned by the fall of an house, when he stood most upon his
guard, strucken dead by the fall of a tortoise shell, which fell out
of the tallants of a eagle flying in the air? and another choaked with
the kernel of a grape?  And an Emperour die by the scratch of a combe,
whilest he was combing his head?  And Aemylius Lepidus with hitting
his foot against a doore-seele?  Add Aufidius with stumbling against
the Consull-chamber doore as he was going in thereat?  And Cornelius
Gallus, the Praetor, Tigillinus, Captaine of the Romane watch,
Lodowike, sonne of Guido Gonzaga, Marquis of Mantua, end their daies
betweens womens thighs?  And of a farre worse example Speusippus, the
Platonian philosopher, and one of our Popes?  Poore Bebius a judge,
whilest he demurreth the sute of a plaintife but for eight daies,
behold his last expired: And Caius Iulius a Physitian, whilest he was
aniointing the eies of one of his patients, to have his owne sight
closed for ever by death.  And if amongst these examples, I may adde
one of a brother of mine, called Captam Saint Martin, a man of three
and twentie yeares of age, who had alreadie given good testimonie of
his worth and forward valour, playing at tennis, received a blow with

----- 1 HOR. 1. ii.  Od. xiii. 13.

a ball, that hit him a little above the right eare, without appearance
of any contusion, bruse, or hurt, and never sitting or resting upon
it, died within six houres after of an apoplexie, which the blow of
the ball caused in him.  These so frequent and ordinary examples,
hapning, and being still before our eies, how is it possible for man
to forgo or forget the remembrance of death? {usthem+} and why should
it not continually seeme unto us, that shee is still ready at hand to
take us by tae throat?  What matter is it, will you say unto me, how
and in what manner it is, so long as a man doe not trouble and vex
himselfe therewith?  I am of this opinion, that howsoever a man may
shrowd or hide himselfe from her dart, yea, were it under an oxe-hide,
I am not the man would shrinke backe: it sufficeth me to live at my
ease; and the best recreation I can have, that doe I ever take; in
other matters, as little vain glorious, and exemplare as you list.

  ----- praetulerim delirus inersque videri

  Dum mea delectent mala me, vel dinique fallant,

  Quam sapere et ringi./1


  A dotard I had rather seeme, and dull

  Sooner my faults may please make me a gull,

  Than to be wise, and beat my vexed scull.

But it is folly to thinke that way to come unto it.  They come, they
goe, they trot, they daunce: but no speech of death.  All that is good
sport. But if she be once come, and on a sudden openly surprise,
either them, their wives, their children, or their friends', what
torments, what out-cries, what rage, and what despaire doth then
overwhelme them? saw you ever anything so drooping, so changed, and so
distracted?  A man must looke to it, and in better times fore-see
it. {Prospero+} And might that brutish carelessenesse lodge in the
minde of a man of understanding (which I find altogether impossible)
she sels us her ware at an overdeere rate: were she an enemie by mans
wit to be avoided, I would advise men to borrow the weapons 1
HOR. 1. ii.  Epist. ii. 126.  of cowardlinesse: but since it may not
be, and that be you either a coward or a runaway, an honest or valiant
man, she overtakes you,

  Nempe et fugacem persequitur virum

  Nec parcit imbellis juventa

  Poplitibus, timidoque tergo./1


  Shee persecutes the man that flies

  Shee spares not weake youth to surprise,

  But on their hammes and backe turn'd plies.


And that no temper of curace may shield or defend you,

  Ille licet ferro cautus se condat et aere

  Mors tamen inclusum protrahet inde caput./2


  Though he with yron and brasse his head empale

  Yet death his head enclosed thence with hale.

Let us learne to stand, and combat her with a resolute minde.  And
being to take the greatest advantage she hath upon us from her, let us
take a cleane contrary way from the common, let us remove her
strangenesse from her, let us converse, frequent, and acquaint our
selves with her, let us have nothing so much in minde as death, let us
at all times and seasons, and in the ugliest manner that may be, yea
with all faces shapen and represent the same unto our imagination.  At
the stumbling of a horse, at the fall of a stone, at the least prick
with a pinne, let us presently ruminate and say with our selves, what
if it were death it selfe? and thereupon let us take heart of grace,
and call our wits together to confront her. {Prospero+} Amiddest our
bankets, feasts, and pleasures, let us ever have this restraint or
object before us, that is, the remembrance of our condition and let
not pleasure so much mislead or transport us, that we altogether
neglect or forget, how many wayes, our joyes, or our feastings, be
subject unto death, and by how many hold-fasts shee threatens.us and
them.  So did the AEgyptians, who in the middest of their banquetings,
and in the full of their greatest cheere, caused the anatomie of a
dead man

----- 1 HOR. 1. iii.  Od. ii. 14. 2 PROPERT. 1. iii. et xvii. 25.

to be brought before them, as a memorandum and warning to their
guests.

  Omnem crede diem ubi diluxisse supremum,

  Grata superveniet, quo non sperabitur, hora./1


  Thinke every day shines on thee as thy last

  Welcome it will come, whereof hope was past.

It is uncertaine where death looks for us; let us expect her everie
where: the premeditation of death, is a fore-thinking of
libertie. {Prospero+} - He who hath learned to die, hath unlearned to
serve.  There is no evill in life, for him that hath well conceived,
how the privation of life is no evill.  To know how to die, doth free
us from all subjection and constraint. Pualus Emilius answered one,
whom that miserable king of Macedon his prisoner sent to entreat him
he would not lead him in triumph, 'Let him make that request unto
himselfe.' Verily, if Nature afford not some helpe in all things, it
is very hard that art and industrie should goe farre before. Of my
selfe, I am not much given to melancholy, but rather to dreaming and
sluggishness.  There is nothing wherewith I have ever more entertained
my selfe, than with the imaginations of death, yea in the most
licentious times of my age,

  Iucundum, cum aetas florida ver aqeret./2


  When my age flourishin

  Did spend its pleasant spring.

Being amongst faire Ladies, and in earnest play, some have thought me
busied, or musing with my selfe, how to digest some jealousie, or
meditating on the uncertaintie of some conceived hope, when God he
knowes, I was entertaining my self with the remembrance of some one or
other, that but few daies before was taken with a burning fever, and
of his sodaine end, coming from such a feast or meeting where I was my
selfe, and with his head full of idle conceits, of love, and merry
glee; supposing the same, either sickness or end, to be as neare me as
him.

----- 1 HOR. 1. i.  Epist. iv. 13.  CATUL.  Eleg. iv. 16

  Iam fuerit nec post, unquam revocare licebit./1


  Now time would be, no mor

  You can this time restore.

I did no more trouble my selfe or frowne at such conceit, than at any
other. It is impossible we should not apprehend or feele some motions
or startings at such imaginations at the first, and cmomming sodainely
upon us: but doubtlesse, he that shall manage and meditate upon them
with an impartiall eye, they will assuredly, in tract of time, become
familiar to him: Otherwise, for my part, I should he in continuall
feare and agonie; for no man did ever more distrust his life, nor make
lesse account of his continuance: Neither can health, which hitherto I
have so long enjoied, and which so seldome hath beene crazed, lengthen
my hopes, nor any sicknesse shorten them of it.  At every minute me
thinkes I make an escape.  And I uncessantly record unto my selfe,
that whatsoever may be done another day, may be effected this day.
Truly hazards and danger doe little or nothing approach us at our end:
And if we consider, how many more there remaine, besides this
accident, which in number more than millions seeme to threaten us, and
hang over us; we shall find, that be we sound or sicke, lustie or
weake, at sea or at land, abroad or at home, fighting or at rest, in
the middest of a battell or in our beds, she is ever alike neere unto
us. {usthem+} Nemo altero fragilior est, nemo in crastinum sui
certior: 'No man is weaker then other; none surer of himselfe (to
live) ull to morrow.' Whatsoever I have to doe before death, all
leasure to end the same seemeth short unto me, yea were it but of one
houre.  Some body not long since turning over my writing tables',
found by chance a memoriall of something I would have done after my
death: I told him (and indeed it was true), that being but a mile from
my house, and in perfect health and lustie, I had made haste to write
it, because I could not assure my self I should ever come home

----- 1 LUCR. 1. iii. 947.

in safety: As one that am ever hatching of mine owne thoughts, and
place them in my selfe: I am ever prepared about that which I may be:
nor can death come when she please) put me in mind of any new thing.
A man should ever, as much as in him lieth, be ready booted to take
his journey, and above all things, looke he have then nothing to doe
but with himselfe.

  Quid brevi fortes jaculamur aevo multa?/1

  To aime why are we ever bold,

  At many things in so short hold?

For then we shall have worke sufficient, without any more accrease.
Some man complaineth more that death doth hinder him from the assured
course of an hoped for victorie, than of death it selfe; another cries
out, he should give place to her, before he have married his daughter,
or directed the course of his childrens bringing up; another bewaileth
he must forgo his wives company; another moaneth the losse of his
children, the chiefest commodities of his being.  I am now by meanes
of the mercy of God in such a taking, that without regret or grieving
at any worldly matter, I am prepared to dislodge, whensoever he shall
please to call me: I am every where free: my farewell is soone taken
of all my friend, except of my selfe.  No man did ever prepare
himselfe to quit the world more simply and fully, or more generally
spake of all thoughts of it, than I am fully assured I shall doe.  The
deadest deaths are the best.

----- miser, o miser (aiunt) omnia ademit

Una dies infesta mihi, tot praemia vitae./2

  O wretch, O wretchh (friends cry), one day

  All joyes of life hath tane away:

And the builder,

----- manent (saith he) opera interrupta, minaeqe Murorum ingentes./3

  The workes unfinisht lie

  And walls that threatned hie.

----- 1 HOR. 1. ii.  Od. xiv. 2 LUCR. 1. iii. 942. 3 VIRG.
Aen. 1. iv. 88.

     A man should designe nothing so long afore hand, or at least with
     such an intent, as to passionate himselfe to see the end of it;
     we are all borne to be doing.

  Cum moriar, medium solvar et inter opus./1


  When dying I my selfe shall spend

  Ere halfe my businesse come to end.


I would have a man to be doing, and to prolong his lives offices as
much as lieth in him, and let death seize upon me whilest I am setting
my cabiges, care-lesse of her dart, but more of my unperfect garden.
I saw one die, who being at his last gaspe, uncessantly complained
against his destinie, and that death should so unkindly cut him off in
the middest of an historie which he had in hand, and was now come to
the fifteenth or sixteenth of our Kings.

  Illud in his rebus non addunt, nec tibi earum

  Iam desiderium rerum super insidet una./2


  Friends adde not that in this case, now no mor

  Shalt thou desire, or want things wisht before.


A man should rid himselfe of these vulgar and hurtful humours.  Even
as Churchyards were first placed adjoyning unto churches, and in the
most frequented places of the City, to enure (as Lycurgus said) the
common people, women and children, not to be skared at the sight of a
dead man, and to the end that continuall spectacle of bones, sculs,
tombes, graves and burials should forewarne us of our condition, and
fatall end.

  Quin etiam exhilarare viris convivia caede

  Mos olim, et misercere epulis spectacula dir

  Certantum ferro, saepe et super ipsa cadentu

  Pocula, respersis non parco sanguine mensis./3


  Nay more, the manner was to welcome guests

  And with dire shewes of slaughter to mix feasts

  Of them that fought at sharpe, and with bords tainte

  Of them with much bloud, who o'er full cups fainted.


----- 1 OVID.  Am. 1. ii.  El. x. 36. 2 Lucr. 1. iii. 944. 3 SYL.
Ital. 1. xi. 51.

     And even as the AEgyptians after their feastings and carousings
caused a great image of death to be brought in and shewed to the
guests and by- standers, by one that cried aloud, 'Drinke and be
merry, for such shalt thou be when thou art dead:' So have I learned
this custome or lesson, to have alwaies death,not only in my
imagination, but continually in my mouth.  And there is nothing I
desire more to be informed of than of the death of men; {usthem+} that
is to say what words, what countenance, and what face they shew at
their death; and in reading of histories, which I so attentively
observe.  It appeareth by the shuffling and hudling up of my examples,
I affect no subject so particularly as this. Were I a composer of
books, I would keepe a register, commented of the divers deaths, which
in teaching men to die, should after teach them to live.  Dicearcus
made one of that title, but of another and lesse profitable end.  Some
man will say to mee, the effect exceeds the thought so farre, that
there is no fence so sure, or cunning so certaine, but a man shall
either lose or forget if he come once to that point; let them say what
they list: to premeditate on it, giveth no doubt a great advantage:
and it is nothing, at the least, to goe so farre without dismay or
alteration, or without an ague?  There belongs more to it: Nature her
selfe lends her hand, and gives us courage.  If it be a short and
violent death, wee have no leisure to feare it; if otherwise, I
perceive that according as I engage my selfe in Sicknesse, I doe
naturally fall into some disdaine and contempt of life.  I finde that
I have more adoe to digest this resolution, that I shall die when I am
in health, than I have when I am troubled with a fever: forsomuch as I
have no more such fast hold on the commodities of life, whereof I
begin to lose the use and pleasure, and view death in the face with a
lesse undanted looke, which makes me hope, that the further I goe from
that, and the nearer I approch to this, so much more easily doe I
enter in composition for their exchange.  Even as I have tried in many
other occurrences, which Caesar affirmed, that often some things seeme
greater, being farre from us, than if they bee neere at hand: I have
found that being in perfect health, I have much more beene frighted
with sicknesse, than when I have felt it.  The jollitie wherein I
live, the pleasure and the strength make the other seeme so
disproportionable from that, that by imagination I amplifie these
commodities by one moitie, and apprehended them much more heavie and
burthensome, than I feele them when I have them upon my shoulders.
The same I hope will happen to me of death.  Consider we by the
ordinary mutations and daily declinations which we suffer, how Nature
deprives us of the sight of our losse and impairing: what hath an aged
man left him of his youths vigour; and of his forepast life?

  Heu senibus vitae portio quanta manet


  Alas to men in yeares how smal

  A part of life is left in all?


Caesar to a tired and crazed Souldier of his guard, who in the open
street came to him, to beg leave he might cause himselfe to be put to
death; viewing his decrepit behaviour, answered plesantly: 'Doest thou
thinke to be alive then?' Were man all at once to fall into it, I doe
not thinke we should be able to beare such a change, but being faire
and gently led on by her hand, in a slow, and as it were unperceived
desease; by little and little, and step by step, she roules us into
that miserable state, and day by day seekes to acquaint us with it.
So that when youth failes in us, we feele, nay we perceive no shaking
or transcharge at all in our selves: which in essence and veritie is a
harder death, than that of a languishing and irkesome life, or that of
age.  Forsomuch as the leape from an ill being unto a not being, is
not so dangerous or steepie; as it is from a delightfull and
flourishinz being unto a painfull and sorrowfull condition.  A-weake
bending, and faint stopping bodie hath lesse strength to beare and
under goe a heavie burden: So hath our soule.  She

----- 1 COR.  Gal. 1. i. 16.

must bee rouzed and raised against the violence and force of this
adversarie. For as it is impossible she should take any rest whilest
she feareth: whereof if she be assured (which is a thing exceeding
humane condition) she may boast that it is impossible unquietnesse,
torment, and feare, much lesse the least displeasure should lodge in
her.

  Non vultus instantis tyrann

  Mente qualit solida, neque Auster,

  Dux inquieti turbidus Adriae

  Nec fulminantis magna Jovis manus./1


  No urging tyrants threatning face

  Where mind is foun can it displace

  No troublous wind the rough seas Master

  Nor Joves great hand the thunder-caster.


She is made Mistris of her passions and concupiscence, Lady of
indulgence, of shame of povertie, and of all fortunes
injuries. {Cordelia+} Let him that can, attaine to this advantage.
Herein consists the true and soveraigne liberty, {freedom+} that
affords us meanes wherewith to jeast and make a scorne of force and
injustice, and to deride imprisonment, gives, or fetters. {Seneca+}

----- in manicis, e

Compedibus, saevo te sub custode tenebo Ipse Deus simul atque volam,
me solvet opinor Hoc sentit, moriar.  Mors ultima linea rerum est./2

  In gyves and fetters I will hamper thee

  Under a Jayler that shall cruell be

  Yet, when I will, God me deliver shall

  He thinkes, I shall die: death is end of all.

Our religion hath had no surer humane foundation than the contempt of
life. Discourse of reason doth not only call and summon us unto it.
For why should we feare to lose a thing, which being lost, cannot be
moaned? but also, since we are threatened by so many kinds of death,
there is no more inconvenience to feare them all, than to endure one:
what matter is it when it commeth, since it is unavoidable?  Socrates

----- 1 HOR. 1. iii.  Od. iii. 2 HOR. 1. i.  Ep. xvi. 76.

answered one that told him, 'The thirty tyrants have condemned thee to
death.' 'And Nature them,' said he.  What fondnesse is it to carke and
care so much, at that instant and passage from all exemption of paine
and care?  As our-birth brought us the birth of all things, so shall
our death the end of all things.  Therefore is it as great follie to
weepe, we shall not live a hundred yeeres hence, as to waile we lived
not a hundred yeeres agoe. 'Death is the beginning of another life."
So wept we, and so much did it cost us to enter into this life; and so
did we spoil us of our ancient vaile in entring into it.  Nothing can
be grievous that is but once.  Is it reason so long to fear a thing of
so short time?  Long life or short life is made all one by death.  For
long or short is not ill things that are no more.  Aristotle saith,
there are certaine little beasts alongst the river Hyspanis, that live
but one day; she whieh dies at 8 o'clocke in the morning, dies in her
youth, and she that dies at 5 in the afternoon, dies in her
decrepitude, who of us doth not laugh, when we shall see ihis short
moment of continuance to be had in consideration of good or ill
fortune? The most and the least is ours, if we compare it with
eternitie, or equall it to the lasting of mountains, rivers, stars,
and trees, or any other living creature, is not lesse ridiculous.  But
nature compels us to it. Depart (saith she) out of this world, even as
you came into it.  The same way you came from death to life, returne
without passion or amazement, from life to death: your death is but a
peece of the worlds order, and but a parcell of the worlds life.

      ----- inter se mortales mutua vivunt

  Et quasi cursores vitae lampada tradunt./1


  Mortall men live by mutuall entercourse

  And yeeld their life-torch, as men in a course. {usthem+}

Shal I not change the goodly contexture of things, for you?  It is the
condition of your creation: death is a part of ourselves: you flie
from yourselves. The

----- 1 LUCRET, ii. 74, 77.

being you enjoy is equally shared betweene life and death.  The first
day of your birth doth as well addresse you to die, as to live.

  Prima quae vitam dedit, hora, carpsit./1


  The first houre, that to m

  Gave life, strait, cropt it then.


  Nascentes morimur, fluisque ab origine pendet./2


  As we are borne we die; the end

  Doth of th' originall depend.


All the time you live, you steale it from death: it is at her charge.
The continuall worke of your life, is to contrive death: {Prospero+}
you are in death, during the time you continue in life: for, you are
after death, when you are no longer living.  Or if you had rather have
it so, you are dead after life: but during life, you are still dying:
and death doth more rudely touch the dying than the dead, and more
lively and essentially. If you have profited by life, you have also
beene fed thereby, depart then satisfied.

  Cur non ut plenus vitae conviva recedis/3


  Why like a full-fed guest,

  Depart you not to rest?

If you have not knowne how to make use of it: if it were unprofitable
to you, what need you care to have, lost it? to what end would you
enjoy it longer?

      -----cur amplius addere quaeri

  Rursum quod percat male, et ingratum occidat omne?/4


  Why seeke you more to gaine, what must againe,

  All perish ill, and passe with griefe or paine?

Life in itselfe is neither good nor evill; it is the place of good or
evill, according as you prepare it for them.  And if you have lived
one day, you have seene all: one day is equal to all other daies.
There is no other light, there is no other night.  This Sunne, this

----- SEN.  Her.  Sur. chor. iii.  MANIL.  Ast. 1. iv.
LUCRET. 1. iii. 982.  LUCRET. 1. iii. 989.

  Non alium videre patres, aliumve nepotes

  Aspicient./1


  No other saw our Sires of old

  No other shall their sonnes behold.

And if the worst happen, the distribution and varietie of all the acts
of my comedie, is performed in one yeare.  If you have observed the
course of my foure seasons; they containe the infancie the youth, the
viriltie, and the old age of the world.  He hath plaied his part: he
knowes no other witnesse belonging to it, but to begin againe, it will
ever be the same, and no other.

      ----- Versamur ibidem, atque insumus usque,/2


  We still in one place turne about

  Still there we are, now in, now out.


  Atque in se sua per vestigia volvitur annus./3


  The yeare into it selfe is cas

  By those same steps, that it hath past.


I am not purposed to devise you other new sports.

  Nam tibi praeterea quod machiner, inveniamque

  Quod placeat, nihil est; eadem sunt omnia semper./4


  Else nothing, that T can devise or frame

  Can please thee, for all things are still the same.

Make roome for others, as others have done for you.  Equalitie is the
chiefe ground-worke of equitie, who can complaine to be comprehended
where all are contained? {usthem, Falstaff+} So may you live long
enough, you shall never diminish anything from the time you have to
die: it is bootlesse: so long shall you continue in that state which
you feare, as if you had died being in your swathing-clothes, and when
you were sucking.

----- 1 MANIL. i. 522. 2 LUCRET. 1. iii. 123. 3 VIRG.
Georg. 1. ii. 402. 4 Id. 1. ii. 978.


      ----- licet, quot vis, vivendo vincere secla

  Mors aeterna tamen, nihilominus illa manebit./1


  Though yeeres you live, as many as you will,

  Death is eternall, death remaineth still.

And I will so please you, that you shall have no discontent.

  In vera nescis nullum fore morte alium te,

  Qui possit vivus tibi te lugere peremptum

  Stansque jacentem./1


  Thou know'st not there shall be not other thou

  When thou art dead indeed, that can tell ho

  Alive to waile thee dying

  Standing to waile thee lying.


Nor shall you wish for life, which you so much desire.

  Nec sibi enim quisquam tum se vitamque requirit,/

  Nec desiderium nostri nos afficit ullum./4


  For then none for himselfe himselfe or life requires

  Nor are we of our selves affected with desires.


Death is lesse to be feared than nothing, if there were anything lesse
than nothing.

      ----- multo mortem minus ad nos esse putandum

  Si minus esse potest quam quod nihil esse videmus./5


  Death is much less to us, we ought esteeme

  If lesse may be, than what doth nothing seeme.

Nor alive, nor dead, it doth concern you nothing.  Alive because you
are: Dead, because you are no more.  Moreover, no man dies before his
houre. The time you leave behinde was no more yours than that which
was before your birth, and concerneth you no more.

  Respice enim quam nil ad nos anteacta vetusta

  Temporis aeterni fuent.6


  For marke, how all antiquitie foregon

  Of all time ere we were, to us was none.

Wheresoever your life ended, there is it all.  The

----- 1 LUCRET. 1. iii. 11262 Ib. 9. 3 Ib. 963. 4 Ib. 966.5 Ib. 970. 6
Ib. 1016.

profit of life consists not in the space, but rather in the use.  Some
man hath lived long, that hath a short life, Follow it whilst you have
time.  It consists not in number of yeeres, but in your will, that you
have lived long enough.  Did you thinke you should never come to the
place, where you were still going?  There is no way but hath an end.
And if company may solace you, doth not the whole world walke the same
path?

         ----- Omnia te, vita perfuncta, sequentur./1

  Life past, all things at las

  Shall follow thee as thou hast past.

Doe not all things move as you doe, or keepe your course?  Is there
any thing grows not old together with yourselfe?  A thousand men, a
thousand beasts, and a thousand other creatures die in the very
instant that you die.

  Nam nox nulla diem, neque noctem aurora sequuta est

  Que non audierit mistus vagitibus aegri

  Ploratus, mortis comites et funeris atri./2


  No night ensued day light; no morning folloived night

  Which heard not moaning mixt with sick-mens groaning

  With deaths and funerals joyned was that moaning.

To what end recoile you from it, if you cannot goe backe.  You have
seene many who have found good in death, ending thereby many many
miseries.  But have you seene any that hath received hurt thereby?
Therefore it is meere simplicitie to condemne a thing you never
approve, neither by yourselfe nor any other.  Why doest thou complaine
of me and of destinie?  Doe we offer thee any wrong? is it for thee to
direct us, or for us to governe thee? Although thy age be not come to
her period, thy life is.  A little man is a whole man as well as a
great man.  Neither men nor their lives are measured by the Ell.
Chiron refused immortalitie, being informed of the conditions thereof,
even by the God of time and of continuance, Saturne his

----- I LUCRET. 1. iii. 1012. 2 Id. 1. ii, 587.

father.  Imagine truly how much an ever-during life would be lesse
tolerable and more painfull to a man, than is the life which I have
given him. {Struldbrugs+} Had you not death you would then uncessantly
curse, and cry out against me, that I had deprived you of it.  I have
of purpose and unwittingiv blended some bitternesse amongst it, that
so seeing the cornmoditie of its use, I might hinder you from
over-greedily embracing, or indiscreetly calling for it.  To continne
in this moderation, that is, neither to fly from life nor to run to
death (which I require of you) I have tempered both the one and other
betweene sweetnes and sowrenes.  I first taught Thales, the chiefest
of your Sages and Wisemen, that to live and die were indifferent,
which made him answer one very wisely, who asked him wherefore he died
not: 'Because,' said he, 'it is indifferent.  The water, the earth,
the aire, the fire, and other members of this my universe, are no more
the instruments of thy life than of thy death.  Why fearest thou thy
last day? he is no more guiltie, and conferreth no more to thy deith,
than any of the others.  It is not the last step that causeth
weariness: it only declares it.  All daies march towards death, only
the last comes to it.' Behold heere the good precepts of our
universall mother Nature.  I have oftentimes bethought my self whence
it proceedeth, that in times of warre, the visage of death (whether
wee see it in us or in others) seemeth without all comparison much
lesse dreadful and terrible unto us, than in our houses, or in our
beds, otherwise it should be an armie of Physitians and whiners, and
she ever being one, there must needs bee much more assurance amongst
countrie-people and of base condition, than in others.  I verily
believe, these fearefull lookes, and astonishing countenances
wherewith we encompass it, are those that more amaze and terrifie us
than death: a new forme of life; the out cries of mothers; the wailing
of women and children; the visitation of dismaid and swouning friends;
the assistance of a number of pale-looliing, distracted, and whining
servants; a darke chamber: tapers burning round about; our couch beset
round with Physitians and Preachers; and to conclude, nothing but
horror and astonishment on every side of us: are wee not already dead
and buried? The very children are afraid of their friends, when they
see them masked; and so are we.  The maske must as well be taken from
things as from men, which being removed, we shall find nothing hid
under it, but the very same death, that a seely varlet, or a simple
maid-servant, did latterly suffer without amazement or feare.  Happie
is that death which takes all leasure from the preparations of such an
equipage.

CHAPTER 1.XX+ OF THE FORCE OF IMAGINATION

Fortis imaginatio generat casum: "A strong imagination begetteth
chance,' say learned clearks.  I am one of those that feele a very
great conflict and power of imagination.  All men are shockt
therewith, and some overthrowne by it.  One impression of it pierceth
me, and for want of strength to resist her, my endevour to avoid it.
I could live with the only assistance of holy and merry-hearted men.
The sight of others anguishes doth sensibly drive me into anguish; and
my sense hath often usurped the sense of a third man.  If one cough
continually, he provokes my lungs and throat.  I am more unwilling to
visit the sicke dutie doth engage me unto, than those to whom I am
little beholding, and regard least.  I apprehend the evill which I
studie, and place it in me.  I deeme it not strange that she brings
both agues and death to such as give her scope to worke her will and
applaud her.  Simon Thomas was a great Pbysitian in his daies.  I
remember upon a time comming by chance to visit a rich old man that
dwelt in Tholouse, and who was troubled with the cough of the lungs,
who discoursing with the said Simon Thomas of the meanes of his
recoverie, he told him, that one of the best was, to give me occasion
to be delighted in his companie, and that fixing his eyes upon the
liveliness and freshness of my face and setting his thoughts upon the
jolitie and vigor, wherewith my youthful age did then flourish, and
filling all his senses with my flourishing estate, his habitude might
thereby be amended, and his health recovered.  But he forgot to say,
that mine might also be empaired and infected.  Gallus Vibius did so
well enure his minde to comprehend the essence and motions of folly,
that he so transported his judgement from out his seat, as he could
never afterwards bring it to his right place againe; and might rightly
boast to have become a foole through wisdome.  Some there are, that
through feare anticipate the hang-mans hand; as he did, whose friends
having obtained his pardon, and putting away the cloth wherewith he
was hoodwinkt, that he might heare it read, was found starke dead upon
the scaffold, wounded only by the stroke of imagination.  Wee sweat,
we shake, we grow pale, and we blush at the motions of our
imaginations; and wallowing in our beds we feele our bodies agitated
and turmoiled at their apprehensions, yea in such manner as sometimes
we are ready to yeeld up the spirit.  And burning youth (although
asleepe) is often therewith so possessed and enfolded, that dreaming
it doth satisfy and enjoy her amorous desires.

  Ut quasi transactis saepe omnibu' rebu' profundan

  Fluminis ingentes fluctus, vestemnque cruentent./1


  And if all things were done, they powre foorth streames

  And bloodie their night-garment in their dreames.

And although it be not strange to see some men have hornes growing
upon their head in one night, that had none when they went to bed:
notwithstanding the fortune or success of Cyppus King of Italie is
memorable, who because the day before he had with earnest affection
assisted and beene attentive at a bul-baiting, and having all night
long dreamed of hornes in his head, by the very force of imagination
brought them forth the next morning in his forehead.  An earnest
passion gave the son of Croesus his voice, which Nature denied him.
And Antiochus got an ague, by the excellent beautie of Stratonice so
deeply imprinted in his minde.  Plinie reporteth to have seene Lucius
Cossitius upon his marriage day to have beene transformed from a woman
to a mam.  Pontanus and others recount the like metamorphosies to have
hapned in

----- 1 LUCRET. 1. iv. 1027.

Italie these ages past: And through a vehement desire of him and his
mother.

  Vota puer solvit, que femina voverat Iphis./1


  Iphis a boy, the vowes then paid,

  Which he vow'd when he was a maid.

My selfe traveling on a time by Vitry in France, hapned to see a man,
whom the Bishop of Soissons has in confirmation, named Germane, and
all the inhabitants thereabout have both knowne and seene to be a
woman-childe, untill she was two and twentie yeares of age, called by
the name of Marie. He was, when I saw him, of good yeares, and had a
long beard, and was yet unmarried.  He saith, that upon a time,
leaping, and straining himselfe to overleape another, he wot not how,
but where before he was a woman, he suddenly felt the instrument of a
man to come out of him: and to this day the maidens of that towne and
countrie have a song in use, by which they warne one another, when
they are leaping, not to straine themselves overmuch, or open thir
legs too wide, for feare they should bee turned to boies, as Marie
Germane was.  It is no great wonder, that such accidents doe often
happen, for if imagination have power in such things, it is so
continually annexed, and so forcibly fastened to this subject, that
lest she should so often fall into the relaps of the same thought, and
sharpnesse of desire, it is better one time for all to incorporate
this virile part unto wenches.  Some will not sticke to ascribe the
scarres of King Dagobert, or the cicatrices of Saint Francis unto the
power of Imagination.  Othersome will say, that by the force of it,
bodies are sometimes removed from their places.  And Celsus reports of
a Priest, whose soule was ravished into such an extasie, that for a
long time the body remained void of all respiration and sense.  Saint
Augustine speaketh of another, who if hee but heard any lamentable and
wailefull cries, would suddenly

----- 1 OVID.  Met. 1. ix. 794.

fall into a swone, and bee so forcibly carried from himselfe, that did
any chide and braule never so loud, pinch and thumpe him never so
much, be could not be made to stirre, untill hee came to himselfe
againe.  Then would he say, he had heard sundry strange voyces,
comming as it were from a farre, and perceiving his pinches and
bruses, wondered at them.  And that it was not an obstinate conceit,
or wilfull humour in him, or against his feeling sense, it plainly
appeared by this, because during his extasie, he seemed to have
neither pulse nor breath.  It is very likely that the principall
credit of visions, of enchantments, and such extraordinary effects,
proceedeth from the power of imaginations, working especially in the
mindes of the vulgar sort, as the weakest and seeliest, whose conceit
and beleefe is so seized upon, that they imagine to see what they see
not.  I am yet in doubt, these pleasant bonds, wherewith our world is
so fettered, and France so pestered, that nothing else is spoken of,
are haply but the impressions of apprehension, and effects of feare.
For I know by experience, that some one, for whom I may as well answer
as for my selfe, and in whom no manner of suspition either of
weaknesse or enchantment might fall, hearing a companion of his make
report of an extraordinary faint sowning, wherein he was fallen, at
such a time as he least looked for it and wrought him no small shame,
whereupon the horrour of his report did so strongly strike his
imagination, as he ranne the same fortune, and fell into a like
drooping.  And was thence forward subject to fall into like fits: So
did the passionate remembrance of his inconvenience possesse and
tyrannize him; but his fond doting was in time remedied by another
kinde of raving.  For himselfe avowing and publishing aforehand the
infirmitie he was subject unto, the contention of his soule was
solaced upon this, that bearing his evil as expected, his dutie
thereby diminished, and he grieved lesse thereat.  And when at his
choice, he hath had law and power (his thought being cleered and
unmasked, his body finding it selfe in his right due place) to make
the same to be felt, seized upon, and apprehended by others knowledge:
he hath fully and perfectly recovered himselfe.  If a man have once
beene capable, he cannot afterward be incapable, except by a just and
absolute weaknesse.  Such a mischief is not to be feared, but in the
enterprises where our minde is beyond all measure bent with desire and
respect; and chiefly where opportunitie comes unexpected, and requires
a sudden dispatch. There is no meanes for a man to recover himselfe
from his trouble; I know some, who have found to come unto it with
their bodies as it were halfe glutted elsewhere, thereby to stupifie
or allay the heat of that furie, and who through age, finde themselves
lesse unable, by how much more they be lesse able: And another, who
hath also found good, in that a friend of his assured him to bee
provided with a counter-battery of forcible enchantments, to preserve
him in any such conflict: It is not amisse I relate how it was.  An
Earle of very good place, with whom I was familiarly acquainted, being
married to a very faire Lady, who had long beene solicited for love by
one assisting at the wedding, did greatly trouble his friends; but
most of all an old Lady his kins-woman, who was chiefe at the
marriage, and in whose house it was solemnized, as she that much
feared such sorceries and witchcrafts: which shee gave mee to
understand, I comforted her as well as I could, and desired her to
relie upon me.  I had by chance a peece of golden plate in my trunke,
wherein were ingraven certaine celestiall figures good against the
Sunne-beames, and for the head-ach, being fitly laid upon the suture
of the head: and that it might the better he kept there, it was sewed
to a riband, to be fasteded under the chin.  A fond doting conceit,
and cosin-germane to that we now speake of.  James Peletier had
whilest he lived in my house bestowed that singular gift upon mee; I
advised my selfe to put it to some use, and told the Earle, he might
haply be in danger, and come to some misfortune as others had done,
the rather because some were present, that would not sticke to procure
him some ill lucke, and which was worse, some spitefull shame; but
neverthelesse I willed him boldly to go to bed: For I would shew him
the part of a true friend, and in his need, spare not for his good to
employ a miracle, which was in my power; alwaies provided, that on his
honour he would promise me faithfully to keepe it very secret; which
was only, that when about mid- night he should have his candle brought
hime if he had had no good successe in his businesse, he should make
such and such a signe to me. It fel out his mind was so quailed, and
his eares so dulled, that by reason of the bond wherewith the trouble
of his imagination had tied him, hee could not run on poste: and at
the houre appointed, made the signe agreed upon betweene us, I came
and whispered him in the eare, that under pretence to put us all out
of his chaluber, he should rise out of his bed, and in jesting manner
take my night-gowne which I had on, and put it upon himselfe (which he
might well doe, because wee were much of one stature) and keepe it on
till he had performed my Appointment, which was, that when we should
he gone out of the chamber, he should withdraw himselfe to make water,
and using certaine jestures I had shewed him, speake such words thrice
over.  And every time hee spake them he should girt the ribband, which
I put into his hands, and very carefully place the plate thereto
fastened, just upon his kidneyes, and the whole figure, in such a
posture.  All which when he had accordingly done, and the last time so
fastened the ribband, that it might neither be untide nor stirred from
his place, he should then boldly and confidently returne to his
charge, and not forget to spread my night- gowne upon his bed, but so
as it might cover them both.  These fopperies are the chiefe of the
effect.  Our thought being unable so to free it selfe, but some
strange meanes will proceed from some abstruse learning: There
inanitie gives them weight and credit.  To conclude, it is most
certaine, my Characters proved more venerian than solare, more in
action than in prohibition.  It was a ready and curious humour drew me
to this effect, farre from my nature.  I am an enemie to craftie and
fained actions, {PlainDealer+} and hate all suttletie in my hands, not
only recreative, but also profitable. If the action be not vicious,
the course to it is faultie.  Amasis King of Egypt tooke to wife
Laodice, a very beauteous young virgin of Greece, and he that before
had in every other place found and showed himselfe a lustie gallant,
found himselfe so short, when he came to grapple with her, that he
threatned to kill her, supposing it had beene some charme or
sorcerie. As in all things that consist in the fantasia, she addrest
him to devotion. And having made his vowes and promises to Venus, he
found himselfe divinely freed, even from the first night, of his
oblations and sacrifices.  Now they wrong us to receive and admit us
with their wanton, squeamish, quarellous countenances, which setting
us afire, extinguish us.  Pythagoras his neece was wont to say, that a
woman which lies with a man ought, together with her petiecoate, leave
off all bashfulnesse, and with her petiecoate, take the same againe.
The minde of the assailant molested with sundry different alarums, is
easily dismaid.  And he whom imagination hath once made to suffer this
shame (and she hath caused the same to be felt but in the first
acquaintances; because they are then burning and violent, and in the
first acquaintance and comming together, or triall a man gives of
himselfe, he is much more afraid and quaint to misse the marke he
shoots at) having begun ill he fals into an ague or spite of this
accident, which afterward continueth in succeeding occasions.  Married
men because time is at their command, and they may go to it when they
list, ought never to presse or importune their enterprise, unlesse
they be readie.  And it is better undecently to faile in hanseling the
nuptiall bed, full of agitation and fits, by waiting for some or other
fitter occasion, {Chris+} and more private opportunitie, less sudden
and alarmed, than to fall into a perpetual miserie, by apprehending an
astonishment and desperation of the first refusall.  Before possession
taken, a patient ought by sallies, and divers times, lightly assay and
offer himselfe without vexing or opiniating himselfe, definitively to
convince himselfe.  Such as know their members docile and tractable by
nature, let them only endevour to countercosin their fantasia.  Men
have reason to checke the indocile libertie of this member, for so
importunately insinuating himselfe when we have no need of him, and so
importunately, or as I may say impertinently failing, at what time we
have most need of him; and so imperiously contesting by his authority
with our will, refusing with such fiercenes and obstinacie our
solicitations both mentall and manuall.  Neverthelesse if a man
inasmuch as he doth gormandize and devour his rebellion, and drawes a
triall by his condemnation, would pay me for to plead his cause, I
would peradventure make other of our members to be suspected to have
(in envy of his importance, and sweetnesse of his use) devised this
imposture, and framed this set quarrell against him. and by some
malicious complot armed the world against him, enviously charging him
alone with a fault common to them all.  For I referre to your thought,
whether there be any one particular part of our body that doth not
sometimes refuse her particular operation to our will and wish, and
that doth not often exercise and practise against our will.  All of
them have their properpassions+, which without any leave of ours doe
either awaken or lull them asleepe.  How often doe the forced motions
and changes of our faces witnesse the secretest and most lurking
thoughts we have, and bewray them to by-standers?  The same cause that
doth animate this member, doth also, unwitting to us, embolden our
heart, our lungs, and our pulses.  The sight of a pleasing object,
reflecting imperceptibly on us, the flame of a contagious or aguish
emotion.  Is there nought besides these muscles and veines, that rise
and fall without the consent, not only of our will, but also of our
thought?  We cannot command our haire to stand on end, nor our skinne
to startle for desire or feare.  Our hands are often carried where we
direct them not.  Our tongue and voice are sometimes to seeke of their
faculties, the one loseth her speech, the other her nimblenesse. Even
when we have nothing to feed upon, we would willingly forbid it: the
appetites to eat, or list to drinke, doe not leave to move the parts
subject to them, even as this other appetite, and so, though it be out
of season, forsaketh us, when he thinks good.  Those instruments that
serve to discharge the belly, have their proper compressions and
dilatations, besides our intent, and against our meaning, as those are
destined to discharge the kidneys.  And that which, the better to
authorize our wills power, Saint Augustin alleageth, to have seene
one, who could at all times command his posterior, to let as many
scapes as he would, and which Vives endeareth by the example of an
other in his daies, who could let tunable and organized ones,
following the tune of any voice propounded into his eares, inferreth
the pure obedience of that member: than which none is commonly more
indiscreet anid tumultuous.  Seeing my selfe know one so skittish and
mutinous, that these fortie yeares keepes his master in such awe,
that, will he or nill be, he will with a continuall breath, constant
and unintermitted custome breake winde at his pleasure, and so brings
him to his grave.  And would to God I knew it but by histories how
that many times our belly being restrained thereof, bring us even to
the gates of a pining and languishijig heath: And that the Emperour,
who gave us free leave to vent at all times, and every where, had also
given us the power to doe it.  But our will, by whose privilege we
advance this reproch, how much more likely, and consonant to trueth
may we tax it of rebellion, and accuse it of sedition, by reason of
its unrulinesse and disobedience.  Will shee at all times doe that
which we would have her willingly to doe?  Is shee not often willing
to effect that which we forbid her to desire? and that to our manifest
prejudice and dammage?  Doth she suffer herselfe to be directed by the
conclusions of our reason?  To conclude, I would urge in defence of my
client, that it would please the judges to consider, that concerning
this matter, his cause being inseparably conjoyned to a comfort, and
indistinctly; yet will not a man addresse himselfe but to him, both by
the arguments and charges, which call no way appertaine to his said
consort.  For, his effect is indeed sometime importunately to invite,
but to refuse never: and also to invite silently and quietly.
Therefore is the sawcinesse and illegalitie of the accusers seene.
Howsoever it be, protesting that advocates and judges may wrangle,
contend, and give sentence, what and how they please, Nature will in
the meane time follow her course; who, had she endued this member with
any particular privilege, yet had she done but right, and shewed but
reason.  Author of the only immortall worke of mortall man.  Divine
worke according to Socrates; and love, desire of immortalitie, and
immortall Damon himselfe.  Some man peradventure, by the effects of
imagination leaveth the pox or kings evill heere, which his companion
carrieth into Spaine againe: loe heere why in such cases men are
accustomed to require a prepared minde, wherefore doe physitians
labour and practise before hand the conceit and credence of their
patients, with so many false promises of their recovery and health,
unlesse it be that the effect of imagination may supple and prepare
the imposture of one of their decoction?  They knew that one of their
trades-masters hath left written, how some men have been found, in
whom the only sight of a potion hath wrought his due operation: all
which humour or caprice is now come into my minde, upon the report
which an apothecarie, whilome a servant in my fathers house, was wont
to tell me, a man by knowledge simple, and by birth a Switzer; a
nation little vaine-glorious, and not much given to lying, which was,
that for a long time he had knowne a merchant in Tholouse, sickish,
and much troubled with the stone, and who often had need of glisters,
who according to the fits and occurrences of his evill, caused them
diversly to be prescribed by physitians.  Which being brought him, no
accustomed forme to them belonging was omitted, and would often taste
whether they were too hot, and view them well.  and lying along upon
his bed, on his bellie, and all complements performed, only injection
excepted, which ceremony ended, the apothecarie gone, and the patient
lying in his bed, even as if he had received a glister indeed, he
found and felt the very same effect which they doe that have
effectually taken them.  And if the physitian saw it had not wrought
sufficiently, he would accordingly give him two or three more in the
same manner.  My witnesse protesteth, that the sicke mans wife, to
save charges (for he paid for them as if he had received them) having
sometimes assaid to make them onely with luke warme water, the effect
discovered the craft, and being found not to worke at all, they were
forced to returne to the former, and use the apothecarie.  A woman
supposing to have swallowed a pinne with her bread, cried and vexed
her-selfe, even as if she had felt an intolerable paine in her throat,
where she imagined the same to sticke; but because there appeared
neither swelling or alteration, a skilfull man deeming it to be but a
fantasie conceived, or opinion, apprehended by eating of some gretty
peece of bread, which haply might pricke her in the swallow, made her
to vomit, and unknonne to her, cast a pin in that which she had
vomited.  Which the woman perceiving and imagining she had cast the
same, was presently eased of her paine.  I have knowne a gentleman,
who having feasted a company of very honest gentlemen and gentlewomen,
in his owne house, by way of sport, and in jest, boasted two or three
daies after (for there was no such thing) that he had made them eat of
a baked cat; where the gentlewoman of the companie apprehended such
horror, that falling into a violent ague and distemper of her
stomacke, she could by no meanes he recovered.  Even brute beasts, as
well as we, are seene to be subject to the power of imagination;
witnesse some dogs, who for sorrow of their masters death are seene to
die, and whom we ordinarily see to startle and harke in their sleep,
and horses to neigh and struggle.  But all this may be referred to the
narrow future of the spirit and the body, entercommunicating their
fortunes one unto another.  It is another thing that imagination doth
sometimes worke, not only against her own body, but also against that
of others.  And even as one body ejecteth a disease to his neighhour,
as doth evidently appeare by the plague, pox, or sore eies, that goe
from one to another:

  Dum spectant oculi laesos, laeduntur et ipsi

  Multaque corporibus transitione nocent./1


  Eies become sore, while they looke on sore eies

  By passage many ills our limmes surprise.

Likewise the imagination moved and tossed by some vehemence, doth cast
some darts, that may offend a strange object.  Antiquitie hath held,
that certaine women of Scithia, being provoked and vexed against some
men, had the power to kill them only with their looke.  The tortoises
and the estriges hatch their egges with their looks only, a signe that
they have some ejaculative vertue.  Td And concerning witches they are
said to have offensive and harme-working eies.

  Nescio quis teneros oculus mihi fascinat agnos./2


  My tender Lambs I cannot see

  By what bad eie, bewitched be.

Magitians are but ill respondents for me.  So it is, that by
experience wee see women to transferre divers markes of their
fantasies, unto children they beare in their wombes: witnes she that
brought forth a blacke-a-more. There was also presented unto Charles,
King of Bohemia, an Emperor, a young girle, borne about Pisa, all
shagd and hairy over and over, which her mother said, to have beene
conceived so, by reason of an image of Saint John Baptist, that was so
painted, and hung over her bed.  That the like is in beasts, is
witnessed by Jacob's sheep, and also by partridges and hares, that
grow white by the snow upon mountaines.  There was lately seene a cat
about my owne house, so earnestly eyeing a bird, sitting upon a tree,
that he

----- 1 OVID.  Am. 1. ii. 219. 2 VIRG.  Buc.  Ecl. iii. 103.

seeing the cat, they both so wistly fixed their looks one upon
another, so long, that at last the bird fell downe as dead in the
cat's pawes, either drunken by his owne strong imagination, or drawne
by some attractive power of the cat.  Those that love hawking, have
haply heard the Falkner tale, who earnestly fixing his sight upon a
kite in the aire, laid a wager that with the only force of his looke,
he would make it come stooping downe to the ground, and as some report
did it many times.  The histories I borrow, I referre to the
consciences of those I take them from.  The discourses are mine, and
hold together by the proofe of reason, not of experiences: each man
may adde his example to them: and who hath none, considering the
number and varietie of accidentes let him not leave to think, there
are store of them.  If I come not well for my selfe, let another come
for me. So in the studie wherein I treat of our manners and motions,
the fabulous testimonies, alwaies provided they be likely and
possible, may serve to the purpose, as well as the true, whether it
hapned or no, be it at Rome or at Paris, to John or Peter, it is
alwaies a tricke of humane capacitie, of which I am profitably advised
by this report.  I see it and reape profit by it, as well in shadow as
in bodie.  And in divers lessons that often histories afford, I
commonly make use of that which is most rare and memorable. Some
writers there are whose end is but to relate the events.  Mine, if I
could attaine to it, should be to declare what may come to passe,
touching the same.  It is justly allowed in schooles, to suppose
similitudes, when they have none.  Yet doe not I so, and concerning
that point, in superstitious religion, I exceed all historicall
credit.  To the examples I here set down, of what I have read, heard
done, or seene, I have forbid my selfe so much as to dare to change
the least, or alter the idlest circumstances.  My conscience doth not
falsifie the least jot.  I wot not whether my insight doth.
Concerning this subject I doe sometimes enter into conceit, that it
may well become a divine, a philosopher, or rather men of exquisite
conscience, and exact wisdome, to write histories.  How can they
otherwise engage their credit on a popular reputation?  How can they
answer for the thoughts of unknowne persons?  And make their bare
conjectures passe for current paiment?  Of the actions of divers
members, acted in their presence, they would refuse to beare witness
of them, if by a judge they were put to their corporall oath.  And
there is no man so familiarly knowne to them, of whose inward
intention they would undertake to answer at full.  I hold it lesse
hazardous to write of things past than present; forasmuch as the
writer is not bound to give account but of a borrowed trueth.  Some
perswade mee to write the affaires of my time, imagining I can see
them with a sight lesse blinded with passion, than other men, and
perhaps neerer, by reason of the accesse which fortune hath given me
to the chiefest of divers factions.  But they will not say, how for
the glory of Salust, I would not take the paines; as one that am a
vowed enemy of observance, to assiduitie, and to constancie, and that
there is nothing so contrarie to my style as a continued narration.  I
doe so often for want of breath breake off and interrupt my selfe.  I
have neither composition nor explication of any worth.  I am as
ignorant as a childe of the phrases and vowels belonging to common
things.  And therefore have I attempted to say what I can,
accommodating the matter to my power.  Should I take any man for a
guide, measure might differ from his.  For, my libertie being so
farre, I might haply publish judgements, agreeing with me, and
consonant to reason, yet unlawfull and punishable.  Plutarke+ would
peradventure tell us of that which he had written, that it is the
workes of others, that his examples+ are in all and everie where true,
that they are profitable to posteritie, and presented with a lustre,
that lights and directs us unto vertue, and that is his worke.  It is
not dangerous, as in a medicinable drug, whether an old tale or
report, be it thus or thus, so or so.

CHAPTER 1.XXI+ THE PROFIT OF ONE MAN IS THE DAMMAGE OF ANOTHER

DEMADES the Athenian condemned a man of the Citie, whose trade was to
sell such necessaries as belonged to burials, under colour, hee asked
too much profit for them: and that such profit could not come unto him
without the death of many people.  This judgement seemeth to be ill
taken, because no man profiteth but by the losse of others: by which
reason a man should condemne all manner of gaine. {liberality+} The
Merchant+ thrives not but by the licentiousnesse of youth; the
Hushandman by dearth of some; the Architect but by the ruine of
houses; the Lawyer by suits and controversies betweene men: it selfe,
and practice of religious ministers, is drawne from our death and
vices. 'No physitian delighteth in the health of his owne
friend,'{LaRocheoucault+} saith the ancient Greeke Comike: 'nor no
Souldier is pleased with the peace of his citie, and so of the rest.'
And which is worse, let every man sound his owne conscience, hee shall
finde that our inward desires are for the most part nourished and bred
in us by the losse and hurt of others; which when I considered, I
began to thinke how Nature doth not gainesay herselfe in this,
concerning her generall policie: for Physitians hold that the birth,
increase, and augmentation of everything, is the alteration and
corruption of another.  Nam quodcunque suis mutatum finibus exit
Continuo hoc mors est illius, quodfuit ante./1

  Whatever from it's bounds doth changed passe,

  That strait is death of that which erst it was.

----- I LUCRET. 1. i. 687, 813; 1. ii. 162; 1. iii. 536.

CHAPTER 1.XXII+ OF CUSTOME, AND HOW A RECEIVED LAW SHOULD NOT EASILY
BE CHANGED

My opinion is that hee conceived aright of the force of custome that
first invented this tale; how a country woman having enured herselfe
to cherish and beare a young calfe in her armes, which continuing,
shee got such a custome, that when he grew to be a great oxe, shee
carried him still in her armes.  For truly Custome is a violent and
deceiving schoole-mistris. She by little and little, and as it were by
stealth, establisheth the foot of her authoritie in us; by which mild
and gentle beginning, if once by the aid of time it have setled and
planted the same in us, it will soone discover a furious and
tyrannicall countenance unto us; against which we have no more the
libertie to lift so much as our eies; wee may plainly see her upon
every occasion to force the rules of Nature: Vsus efficacissimus rerum
omnium magister:/1 Use is the most effectuall master of all things.' I
beleeve Platoes+ den mentioned in his common-wealth, and the
Physitians that so often quit their arts reason by authoritie; and the
same King who by meanes of her, ranged his stomacke to be nourished
with poyson; and the mayden that Albert mentioneth to have accustomed
her-selfe to live upon spiders: and now in the new-found world of the
Indians, there were found divers populous nations, in farre differing
climates, that lived upon them; made provision of then, and carefully
fed them; as also of grass- hoppers, pissemires, lizards, and
nightbats; and a toad was sold for six crownes in a time

----- 1 PLIN.  Epist. xx.

that all such meats were scarce amongst them, which they boyle, rost,
bake, and dresse with divers kinds of sawces.  Others have beene found
to whom our usuall flesh and other meats were mortall and venomous.
Consuetudinis magna est vis; Pernoctant venatores in nive, in montibus
uri se patiuntur: Pugiles claestibus contusi, ne ingemiseunt quidem./1
'Great is the force of custome: Huntsmen wil watch all night in snow,
and endure to bee scorched on the hils: Fencers brused with sand-bags
or endgels, doe not so much as groane.' These forrein examples are not
strange, if wee but consider what we ordinarily finde by travell, and
how custome quaileth and weakeneth our customary senses.  We need not
goe seeke what our neighbours report of the Cataracts of Nile; and
what Philosophers deeme of the celestiall musicke, which is, that the
bodies of it's circles, being solid smooth, and in their rowling
motion, touching and rubbing one against another, must of necessitie
produce a wonderfull harmonie: by the changes and entercaprings of
which, the revolutions, motions, cadences, and carols of the asters
and planets, are caused and transported.  But that universally the
hearing senses of these low world's creatures, dizzied and lulled
asleepe, as those of the AEgyptians are, by the continuation of that
sound, how loud and great soever it be, cannot sensibly perceive or
distinguish the same.  Smiths, Millers, Forgers, Armorers, and such
other, could not possibly endure the noise that commonly rings in
their eares, if it did pierce them as it doth us.  My perfumed Jerkin
serveth for my nose to smell unto, but after I have worne it three or
foure daies together, not I, but others have the benefit of it.  This
is more strange, that notwithstanding long intermissions, custome may
joyne and establish the effect of her impression upon our senses; as
they prove that dwell neere to bells or steeples.  I have my longing
neere unto a tower, where both evening and morning a very great bell
doth chime Ave Marie and Coverfew, which jangling

----- 1 CIC.  Tusc.  Qu. ii.

doth even marke the tower to shake; at first it troubled me much, but
     I was soone acquainted with it, so that now I am nothing offended
     with it, and many times it cannot waken me out of my sleeps.
     Plato did once chide a child for playing with nuts, who answered
     him, 'Thou chidest me for a small matter.' 'Custome,' replied
     Plato, 'is no small matter.' I finde that our greatest vices make
     their first habit in us from our infancie, and that our chiefe
     government and education lieth in our nurses hands. Some mothers
     thinke it good sport to see a childe wring off a chickens necke,
     and strive to beat a dog or cat.  And some fathers are so
     fond-foolish, that they will conster as a good Augur or
     fore-boding of a martiall minde to see their sonnes misuse a
     poore peasant, or tug a lackey, that doth not defend himselfe;
     and impute it to a ready wit, when by some wily disloyaltie, or
     crafty deceit, they see them cousin and over-reach their
     fellowes: yet are they the true seeds or roots of cruelty, of
     tyranny+, and of treason. In youth they bud, and afterward grow
     to strength, and come to perfection by meanes of custome.  And it
     is a very dangerous institution, to excuse so base and vile
     inclinations, with the weaknesse of age, and lightnesse of the
     subject.  First, it is nature that speaketh, whose voice is then
     shriller, purer, and more native, when it is tender, newer, and
     youngest. Secondly, the deformity of the crime consisteth not in
     the difference betweene crownes and pins; it depends of it selfe.
     I finde it more just to conclude thus: why should not hee as well
     deceive one of a crowne as he doth of a pinne? than as commonly
     some doe, saying, alas, it is but a pinne; I warrant you, he will
     not doe so with crownes.  A man would carefully teach children to
     hate vices of their owne genuity, and so distinguish the
     deformity of them, that they may not only eschew them in their
     actions, but above all I hate them in their hearts: and what
     colour soever they beare, the very conceit may seeme odious unto
     them, I know well, that because in my youth I have ever
     accustomed my selfe to tread a plaine-beaten path, and have ever
     hated to entermeddle any manner of deceipt of cousoning-craft,
     even in my childish sports (for truly it is to be noted, that
     Childrens playes are not sports, and should be deemed as their
     most serious actions); there is no pastime so slight, that
     inwardlie I have not a naturall propension and serious care, yea
     extreme contradiction, not to use any deceipt.  I shuffle and
     handle the cards as earnestly for counters, and keepe as strict
     an accompt, as if they were double duckets, when playing with my
     wife or children, it is indifferent to mee whether I win or lose,
     as I doe when I play in good earnest.  How and wheresoever it be,
     mine owne eies will suffice to keepe me in office; none else doe
     watch mee so narrowly; not that I respect more. {PlainDealer+!}
     It is not long since in mine owne house, I saw a little man, who
     at Nantes was borne without armes, and hath so well fashioned his
     feet to those services his hands should have done him, that in
     truth they have almost forgotten their naturall office.  In all
     his discourses he nameth them his hands: he carveth any meat, he
     chargeth and shoots off a pistole, be threads a needle, he
     soweth, he writeth, puts off his cap, combeth his head, plaieth
     at cards and dice; shuffleth and handleth them with as great
     dexteritie as any other man that hath perfect use of his hands:
     the monie I have sometimes given him he hath carried away with
     hist feet, as well as any other could doe with his hands.  I saw
     another, being a Child, that with the bending of his feet
     (because he had no hands) would brandish a two-hand-sword and
     manage a Hol-bard, as nimbly as any man could doe with his hands:
     he would cast them in the aire, then receive them againe, he
     would throw a Dagger, and make a whip to yarke and lash, as
     cunningly as any Carter in France.  But her effects are much
     better discovered in the strange impressions which it worketh in
     our mindes where it meetes not so much resistance.  What cannot
     she bring to passe in our judgements and in our conceits?  Is
     there any opinion so fantastical, or conceit so extravagant (I
     omit to speake of the grosse imposture of religions, wherewith so
     many great nations and so many worthy and sufficient men have
     beene besotted, and drunken: For, being a thing beyond the
     compasse of our humane reason, it is more excusablo if a man that
     is not extraordinarily illuminated thereunto by divine favour,
     doe lose and miscarrie himselfe therein), or of other opinions,
     is there any so strange, that custome hath not planted and
     established by lawes in what regions soever it hath thought good?
     And this ancient exclamation is most just: Non pudet physiumc, id
     est speculatorem venatoremque naturae, ab animis consuetudine
     imbutis quaerere testimonium veritatis?/1 'Is it not a shame for
     a naturall Philosopher, that is the watchman and hunts-man of
     nature, to seeke the testimonie of truth from mindes endued and
     double dide with custome?' I am of opinion, that no fantasie so
     mad can fall into humane imagination, that meetes not with the
     example of some publike custome, and by consequence that our
     reason doth not ground and bring to a stay.  There are certaine
     people that turne their backs towards those they salute, and
     never looke him in the face whom they would honour or
     worship. 'There are others, who when the King spitteth, the most
     favoured Ladie in his court stretcheth forth her hand; and in
     another countrey, where the noblest about him, stoope to the
     ground to gather his ordure in some fine linnen cloth.  Let us
     here by the way insert a tale.  A French Gentleman was ever wont
     to blow his nose in his hand (a thing much against our fashion),
     maintaining his so doing; and who in wittie jesting was very
     famous.  He asked me on a time, what privilege this filthie
     excrement had, that we should have a daintie linnen cloth or
     handkercher to receive the same; and which is worse, so carefully
     fold it up, and keepe the same about us, which should be more
     loathsome to ones stomacke than to see it cast away, as we doe
     all our other excrements and filth.  Mee thought he spake not
     altogether without reason: and custome had taken

----- 1 CIC.  Nat.  Deor. 1. i.

from me the discerning of this strangenesse, which being reported of
another countrie we deeme so hideous.  Miracles are according to the
ignorance wherein we are by nature, and not according to natures
essence; use brings the sight of our judgement asleepe.  The barbarous
heathen are nothing more strange to us than we are to them: {common
humanity+} nor with more occasion, as every man would avow, if after
he had travelled through these farre-fetcht examples, hee could stay
himselfe upon the discourses and soundly conferre them.  Humane reason
is a tincture in like weight and measure, infused into all our
opinions and customes what form soever they be of: infinite in matter:
infinite in diversitie.  But I will returne to my theme.  There are
certaine people, where, except his wife and children, no man speaketh
to the King but through a trunke.  Another nation, where virgins shew
their secret parts openly, and married women diligently hide and cover
them. To which custome, this fashion, used in other places, hath some
relation: where chastitie is nothing regarded but for marriage sake;
and maidens may at their pleasure lie with whom they list; and being
with childe, they may without feare of accusation, spoyle and cast
their chitdren with certaine medicaments, which they have only for
that purpose.  And in another country, if a Merchant chance to marrie,
all other Merchants that are bidden to the wedding are bound to lie
with the bride before her hushand, and the more they are in number,
the more honour and commendation is hers for constancie and capacitie;
the like if a gentleman or an officer marrie; and so of all orders:
except it be a day- labourer, or some other of base condition for then
must the Lord or Prince lie with the bride amongst whom
(notwithstanding this abusive custom) loyaltie in married women is
highly regarded, and held in speciall account during the time they are
married.  Others there are where publike brothel- houses of men are
kept, and where open mart of marriages are ever to be had: where women
goe to the warres with their hushands, and have place, not onely in
fight, but also in command, where they doe not onely weare jewels at
their noses, in their lip and cheekes, and in their toes, but also big
wedges of gold through their paps and buttocks, where when they eat
they wipe their fingers on their thighs, on the bladder of their
genitories, and the soles of their feet; where not children, but
brethren and nephewes inherit; and in some places, the nephewes onely,
except in the succession of the Prince.  Where to order the communitie
of goods, which amongst them is religiously observed, certaine
Soveraigne Magistrats have the generall charge of husbandry and
tilling of the lands, and of the distribution of the fruits, according
to every mans need: where they howle and weepe at their childrens
deaths, and joy and feast at their old mens decease.  Where ten or
twelve men be all in one bed with all their wives; where such women as
lose their hushands, by any violent death, may marrie againe, others
not: where the condition of women is so detested that they kill all
the maiden children as soon as they are borne, and to supply their
naturall need, they buy women of their
neighbours. {Gullivers_Travels+} Where men may at their pleasure,
without alleaging any cause, put away their wives, but they (what just
reason soever they have) may never put away their husbands.  Where
husbands may lawfully sell their wives, if they be barren.  Where they
cause dead bodies first to be boyled, and then to be brayed in a
morter, so long till it come to a kind of pap, which afterward they
mingle with their wine, and so drinke it.  Where the most desired
sepulcher that some wish for, is to bee devoured of dogges, and in
some places of birds.  Where some thinke that blessed soules live in
all liberty, in certaine pleasant fields stored with al commodities,
and that from them proceeds that Eccho which we heare. Where they
fight in the water, and shoot execeeding true with their bowes as they
are swimming.  Where in signe of subjection men must raise their
shoulders and stoope with their heads, and put off their shoes when
they enter their Kings houses.  Where Eunuchs that have religious
women in keeping, because they shall not be loved, have also their
noses and lips cut off.  And Priests that that they may the better
acquaint themselves with their Demons, and take their Oracles, put out
their eyes.  Where every man makes himself a God of what be pleaseth:
the hunter of a Lion or a Fox; the fisher, of a certaine kinde of
Fish; and frame themselves Idols of every humane action or passion:
the Sunne, the Moone, and the earth are their chiefest Gods: the forme
of swearing is, to touch the ground, looking upon the Sunne, and where
they eat both flesh and fish raw.  Where the greatest oath is to
sweare by the name of some deceased man that hath lived in good
reputation in the countrie, touching his grave with the hand.  Where
the new-yeares gifts that Kings send unto Princes their vassals every
yeare, is some fire, which when it is brought, all the old fire is
cleane put out: of which new fire all the neighbouring people are
bound upon paine, laese majestatis, to fetch for their uses.  When the
King (which often cometh to passe) wholly to give himselfe unto
devotion, giveth over his charge, his next successor is bound to doe
like, and convayeth the right of the Kingdome unto the third heire.
Where they diversifie the forme of policie according as their affaires
seeme to require; and where they depose their Kings when they thinke
good, and appoint them certaine ancicnt grave men to undertake and
weald the Kingdoms government, which sometimes is also committed to
the communaltie.  Where both men and women are equally circumcised,
and alike baptised.  Where the souldier, that in one or divers combats
hath presented his King with seven enemies heads, is made noble.
Where some live under that so rare and unsociable opinion of the
mortalitie of soules.  Where women are brought abed without paine or
griefe.  Where women on both their legs weare greaves of Copper: and
if a louse bite them, they are bound by duty of magnanimitie to bite
it againe: and no maid dare marrie, except she have first made offer
of her Virginitie to the King.  Where they salute one another laying
the forefinger on the ground, and then lifting it up toward heaven:
where all men beare burthens upon their head, and women on their
shoulders.  Where women pisse standing, and men cowring. Where in
signe of true friendship they send one another some of their owne
bloud, and offer incense to men which they intend to honour, as they
doe to their Gods: where not only kindred and consanguinitie in the
fourth degree, but in any furthest off, can by no means be tolerated
in marriages: where children sucke till they be four, and sometimes
twelve years old, in which place they deeme it a dismal thing to give
a childe sucke the first day of his birth.  Where fathers have the
charge to punish their male children, and mothers only maidchildren,
and whose punishment is to hang them up by the feet and so to smoke
them.  Where women are circumcised: where they eat all manner of
herbes, without other distinction but to refuse those that have ill
savour: where all things are open, and how faire and rich soever their
houses be, they have neither doors nor windowes, nor any chests to
locke: yet are all theeves much more severely punished there than
anywhere else; where, as monkies do, they kill lice with their teeth,
and thinke it a horrible matter to see them crusht between their
nailes; where men as long as they live never cut their haire nor paire
their nailes: another place where they onely paire the nailes of their
right hand, and those of the left are never cut, but very curiously
maintained: where they endeavour to cherish all the haire growing on
the right side, as long as it will grow, and very often shave away
that of the left side: where in some Provinces neere unto us some
women cherish their haire before, and other some that behinde, and
shave the contrarie: where fathers lend their children, and husbands
their wives to their guests, so that they pay ready money: where men
may lawfully get their mothers with childe: where fathers may he with
their daughters and with their sonnes: where in solemne assemblies and
banquets, without any distinction of blood or alliance, men will lend
one another their children.  In some places men feed upon humane
flesh, and in others, where it is deemed an office of pietie in
children to kill their fathers at a certaine age: in other places
fathers appoint what children shall live and be preserved, and which
die and be cast out, whilest they are yet in their mothers wombe:
where old husbands lend their wives to young men, for what use soever
they please: In other places, where al women are common without sinne
or offence: yea in some places, where for a badge of honour they weare
as many frienged tassels, fastened to the skirt of their garment, as
they have laine with severall men.  Hath not custome also made a
severall common- wealth of women? hath it not taught them to manage
Armies? to levie Armies, to marshall men, and to deliver battles?  And
that which strict- searching Philosophie could never perswade the
wisest, doth she not of her owne naturall instinct teach it to the
grosest headed vulgar?  For we know all nations, where death is not
only condemned, but cherished: where children of seven years of age,
without changing of countenance, or showing any signe of dismay,
endured to be whipped to death; where riches and worldly pelfe was so
despised and holden so contemptible, that the miserablest and neediest
wretch of a Citie would have scorned to stoope for a purse full of
gold.  Havo we not hcard of divers most fertile regions, plenteously
yeelding al maner of necessary victuals, where neverthelesse the most
ordinary cates and daintiest dishes were but bread, water-cresses, and
water?  Did not custome worke this wonder in Chios, that during the
space of seven hundred yeres it was never found or heard of that any
woman or maiden had her honor or honestie called in question?  And to
conclude, there is nothing in mine opinion, that either she doth not,
or cannot: and with reason doth Pindarus, as I have heard say, call
her the Queen and Empresse of all the world. He that was met beating
of his father answered, 'It was the custome of his house; that his
father had so beaten his grandfather, and he his great-grandfather;'
and pointing to his sonne, said, 'This child shall also beat mee when
he shall come to my age.' And the father, whom the sonne haled and
dragged through thicke and thinne in the street, commanded him to stay
at a certaine doore: for himself had dragged his father no further:
which were the bounds of the hereditaire and injurious demeanours the
children of that family were wont to shew their fathers. 'By custome,'
saith Aristotle, 'as often by sicknesse, doe we see women tug and
teare their haires, bite their nailes, and eat cole and earth and more
by custome than by nature doe men meddle and abuse themselves with
men.' The laws of conscience, which we say to proceed from nature,
rise and proceed of custome; every man holding in special regard and
inward veneration the opinions approved, and customes received about
him, cannot without remorse leave them, nor without applause applie
himselfe unto them: {esteem+} when those of Creet would in former ages
curse any man, they besought the Gods to engage him in some bad
custome. But the chiefest effect of her power is to seize upon us, and
so to entangle us, that it shall hardly lie in us to free ourselves
from her hold-fast, and come into our wits againe, to discourse and
reason of her ordinances; verily, because we sucke them with the milke
of our birth, and forasmuch as the worlds visage presents itselfe in
that estate unto our first view, it seemeth we are borne with a
condition to follow that course.  And the common imaginations we finde
in credit about us, and by our fathers seed infused in our soule,
seeme to be the generall and naturall.  Whereupon it followeth, that
whatsoever is beyond the compasse of custome, wee deeme likewise to
bee beyond the compasse of reason, God knowes how for the most part,
unreasonably.  If as we, who study ourselves, have learned to doe,
every man that heareth a just sentence, would prescatly consider, how
it may in any sort belonging unto his private state, each man should
finde that this is not so much a good word as a good blow to the
ordinary sottishnesse of his judgment. {rationalization+}
{selfcriticism+} But men receive the admonitions of truth and her
precepts, as directed to the vulgar, and never to themselves; and in
liew of applying them to their maners, most men most foolishly and
unprofitably apply them to their memorie.  But let us returne to
customes soveraignty: such as are brought up to libertie, and to
command themselves, esteeme all other forme of policie as monstrous
and against nature.  Those that are enured to, Monarchie doe the like.
And what facilitie soever fortune affoordeth them to change, even when
with great difficultie they have shaken off the importunitie of a
tutor, they run to plant a new one with semblable difficulties because
they cannot resolve themselves to hate tutorship. It is by the
meditation of custome that every man is contented with the place where
nature hath setled him; and the savage people of Scotland have nought
to do with Touraine; nor the Scithians with Thessalie.  Darius
demanded of certaine Graecians, 'For what they would take upon them
the Indians custome, to eat their deceased fathers.' (For such was
their maner, thinking they could not possibly give them a more noble
and favourable tomb than in their owne bowels.) They answered him,
'That nothing in the world should ever bring them to embrace so
inhumane a custome.' But having also attempted to perswade the Indians
to leave their fashion and take the Graecians, which was to burne
their corpes, they were much more astonished thereat. Every man doth
so, forsomuch as custome doth so bleare us that we cannot distinguish
the true visage of things.

  Nil adeo magnum, nec tam mirabile quicqua

  Principio, quod non minuant mirarier omnes Paulatim./1


  Nothing at flrst so wondrous is, so great.

  But all, t'admire, by little slake their heat.

Having other times gone about to endeare and make some one of our
observations to be of force, and which was with resolute auctoritie
received in most parts about us, and not desiring, as most men doe,
onely to establish the same by the force of lawes and examples, but
having ever bin from her beginning, I found the

----- 1 LUCRET. 1. ii, 1037.

foundation of it so weake that myselfe, who was to confirme it in
others, had much adoe to keepe my countenance.  This is the receipt by
which Plato undertaketh to banish the unnaturall and preposterous
loves of his time, and which hee esteemeth soveraigne and principall:
To wit, that publike opinion may condemne them; that Poets, and all
men else may tell horrible tales of them.  A receit by meanes whereof
the fairest daughters winne no more the love of their fathers, nor
brethren most excellent in beautie the love of their sisters.  The
very fables of Thyestes, of Oedipus, and of Macareus, having with the
pleasures of their songs infused this profitable opinion in the tender
conceit of children.  Certes, chastitie is an excellent virtue, the
commoditie whereof is very well knowne; but to use it, and according
to nature to prevaile with it, is as hard as it is easie, to endeare
it and to prevaile with it according to custome, to lawes and
precepts. The first and universall reasons are of a hard
perscrutation.  And our Masters passe them over in gleaning, or in not
daring so much as to taste them, at first sight cast themselves
headlong into the libertie or sanctuarie of custome.  Those that will
not suffer themselves to be drawne out of his original source, do also
commit a greater error, and submit themselves to savage opinions:
witnesse Chrysippus; who in so many severall places of his
compositions, inserted the small accompt he made of conjunctions, how
incestuous soever they were.  Hee that will free himselfe from this
violent prejudice of custome, shall find divers things received with
an undoubted resolution, that have no other anker but the hoarie head
and frowning wimples of custom, which ever attends them: which maske
being pulled off, and referring all matters to truth and reason, he
shall perceive his judgment, as it were overturned, and placed in a
much surer state. As for example, I will then aske him, what thing can
be more strange than to see a people bound to follow lawes he never
understod?  Being in all his domesticall affaires, as marriages,
donations, testaments, purchases, and sales, necessarily bound to
customary rules, which forsomuch as they were never written nor
published in his owne tongue, he cannot understand, and whereof he
must of necessity purchase the interpretation and use.  Not according
to the ingenious opinion of Isocrates, who counselled his King 'to
make the Trafikes and negotiations of his subjects free, enfranchize
and gameful, and their debates, controversies, and quarrels
burthensome, and charged with great subsidies and impositions.' But
according to a prodigious opinion, to make open sale, and trafficke of
reason itselfe, and to give lawes a course of merchandize, is very
strange.  I commend fortune for that (as our historians report) it was
a Gentleman of Gaskonie, and my Countriman, that first opposed
himselfe against Charles the great, at what time he went about to
establish the Latine and Imperiall lawes amongst us.  What is more
barbarous than to see a nation, where by lawful custome the charge of
judging is sold, and judgments are paid for with readie monie; and
whore justice is lawfully denied him that hath not wherewithall to pay
for it; and that this merchandize hath so great credit, that in a
politicall government there should be set up a fourth estate of
Lawyers, breath-sellers, and pettifoggers, and joyned to the three
ancient states, to wit, the Clergy, the Nobility, and the Communaltie;
which fourth state having the charge of lawes, and sometimes
auctoritie of goods and lives, should make a body, apart and severall
from that of Nobilitie, whence double lawes must follow, those of
honour+ and those of justice; in many things very contrarie do those
as rigorously condemne a lie pocketed up, as these a lie revenged: by
the law and light of armes he that putteth up an injurie shall be
degraded of honour and nobilitie; and he that revengeth himselfe of
it, shall by the civill Law incurre a capitall punishment.  Hee that
shall addresse himselfe to the lawes to have reason for some offence
done unto his honour, dishonoureth himself. {Shylock+} And who doth
not so, is by the Lawes punished and chastised. And of these. so
different parts, both neverthelesse having reference to one head;
those having peace, these war committed to their charge; those having
the gaine, these the honour; these knowledge, these vertue; those
reason, these strength; those the word, these action; those justice,
these valour; those reason, these force; those a long gowne, and these
a short coat, in partage and share.  Touching indifferent things, as
clothes and garments, {Lear+} whosoever will reduce them to their true
end, which is the service and commodity of the bodie, whence dependeth
their originall grace and comlines, for the most fantasticall to my
humour that may be imagined, amongst others I will give them our
square caps; that long hood of plaited velvet, that hangs over our
womens head, with his parti-coloured traile, and that vaine and
unprofitable modell of a member which we may not so much as name with
modestie, whereof notwithstanding we make publike shew and open
demonstration.  Those considerations do neverthelesse never distract a
man of understanding from following the common guise.  Rather, on the
contrary, mee seemeth that all severall, strange, and particular
fashions proceed rather of follie or ambitious affectation than of
true reason: and that a wise man ought inwardly to retire his minde
from the common presse, and hold the same liberty and power to judge
freely of all things, but for outward matters he ought absolutely to
follow the fashions and forme customarily received. {conform_in_dress)
Publike societie hath nought to do with our thoughts; but for other
things, as our actions, our travel, our fortune, and our life, that
must be accommodated and left to its service and common opinions; as
that good and great Socrates, who refused to save his life by
disobeyig the magistrate, yea a magistrate most wicked and unjust.
For that is the rule of rules, and genrall lawe of lawes, for every
man to observe those of the place wherein he liveth.  . . .  GREEK
. . .  Lawes of the native place, To follow, is a grace.

----- 1 Gnom.  Graec. vii.

     Loe here some of another kind.  There riseth a great doubt
     whether any so evident profit may be found in the change of a
     received law, of what nature soever, as there is hurt in removing
     the same; forsomuch as a well- setled policie may be compared to
     a frame or building of divers parts joyned together with such a
     ligament as it is impossible to stirre or displace one, but the
     whole body must needes be shaken, and shew a feeling of it.  The
     Thurians Law-giver instituted that "whosoever would goe about,
     either to abolish any one of the old Lawes, or attempt to
     establish a new, should present himself before the people with a
     rope about his necke, to the end, that if his invention were not
     approved of all men, he should present ly be strangled.' And he
     of Lacedemon laboured all his life to get an assured promise of
     his citizens, that they would never infringe any one of his
     ordinances.  That Ephore or Tribune, who so rudely cut off the
     two strings that Phrinis had added unto musicke, respecteth not
     whether musicke be better or no with them, or whether the accords
     of it be better filled, he hath sufficient reason to condemne
     them, because it is an alteration of the old forme.  It is that
     which the old rustie sword of justice of Marseille did signify.
     I am distasted with noveltie, what countenance soever it shew;
     and I have reason so to be, for I have seene very hurtfull
     effects follow the same.  That which so many yeares since doth so
     presse us, hath not yet exploited all.  But some alleage, with
     apparance, that by accident it hath produced and engendered all,
     yea, both the mischiefes and ruines that since are committed
     without against it; it is that a man should blame and finde
     faulte with.

  Heu patior telis vulnera facta meis./1


  Alas I suffer smar

  Procured by mine owne dart. {Lear+}

Those which attempt to shake an estate, are commonly the first
overthrowne by the fall of it: he that is

----- OVID.  Epist, Phyl. 48.

first mover of the same, reapeth not alwayes the fruit of such
troubles; he beats and troubleth the water for others to fish in.  The
contexture and combining of this monarchie and great building, having
bin dismist and disolved by it, namely in her old yeares, giveth as
much overture and entrance as a man will to like injuries.  Royall
Majestie doth more hardly fall from the top to the middle, than it
tumbleth downe from the middle to the bottom.  But if the inventors
are more damageable, the imitators are more vicious, to cast
themselves into examples, of which they have both felt and punished
the horror and mischiefe.  And if there be any degree of honour, even
in ill doing, these are indebted to others for the glory of the
invention and courage of the first attempt.  All sorts of new
licentiousnesse doe haply draw out of this originall and fruitfull
source, the images and patterns to trouble our commonwealth.  We may
reade in our very lawes, made for the remedie of the first evill, the
apprentisage and excuse of all sorts of wicked enterprise: And in
favour of publike vices, they are named with new and more pleasing
words for their excuses, bastardizing and allaying their true titles:
yet it is to reforme our consciences and our conceits, Honesta oratio
est/1 - 'It is an honest speech and well said.' But the best pretence
of innovation or noveltie is most dangerous: Adeo nihil motum ex
antiquo probabile est./2 ,So nothing moved out of the first place is
allowable.' Yet, me seemeth (if I may speake boldly) that it argueth a
great selfe-love and presumption for a man to esteeme his opinions so
far, that for to establish them a man must be faine to subvert a
publike peace, and introduce so many inevitable mischiefes, and so
horrible a corruption of manners, as civill warres and alterations of
a state bring with them, in matters of such consequence, and to bring
them into his owne countrie. Is it not ill husbanded to advance so
many certaine and knowne vices, for to combate contested and debatable

----- 1 TEREN.  Andria Act. i. sc. i. 2 TIT.  LIV. xxxiv. 54.

errors?  Is there any worse kinde of vices than those which shocke a
man's owne conscience and naturall knowledge?  The Senate durst give
this defeate in payment about the controversies betweene it and the
people for the mysterie of their religion: Ad deos id magis quam ad se
pertinere: ipsos visuros, ne sacra sua polluantur:/1 'That that did
rather belong to the Gods than to them, and the Gods should looke to
it, that their due rites were not polluted.' Agreeing with that, which
the Oracle answered those of Delphos, in the Median warre, fearing the
invasions of the Persians. They demanded of that God what they should
doe with the treasures consecrated to his temple, whether hide or cary
them away: who answered them, that they should remove nothing, but
take care of themselves, for he was able to provide for all things
that were fit for him.  Christian religion hath all the markes of
extreme justice and profit, but none more apparent than the exact
commendation of obedience due unto magistrate, and manutention of
policies: what wonderfull example hath divine wisdome left us, which
to establish the: wel-fare of humane kinde, and to conduct this
glorious victorie of hers against death and sinne, would not do it but
at the mercy of our politik order, and hath submitted the progresse of
it, and the conduct of so high and worthie effect, to the blindnesse
and injustice of our observations and customes, suffering the innocent
bloud of so many her favored elect to run, and allowing a long losse
of yeares for the ripening of this inestimable fruit?  There is much
difference betweene the cause of him that followeth the formes and
lawes of his countrie, and him that undertaketh to governe and change
them.  The first alleageth for his excuse, simplicitie, obedicnce, and
example; whatsoever he doth cannot be malice, at the most it is but
ill lucke.  Quis est enim, que non moveat clarissimis monumentis
testata consignataque antiquitas?/2 'For who is he whom antiquitie
will not move, being witnessed and signed with former monuments?'
Besides that which Isocrates saith that defect

----- 1 TIT.  LIV. x. 6. 2 CIC.  Div. 1. i.

hath more part in moderation, than hath excesse.  The other is in much
worse case.  For he that medleth with causing and changing, usurpeth
the authoritie of judging: and must resolve himselfe to see the fault
of what he hunteth for, and the good of what he bringeth in.  This so
vulgar consideration hath confirmed me in my state, and restrained my
youth, that was more rash, from burthening my shoulders with so
filthie a burthen, as to make my selfe respondent of so important a
science.  And in this to dare, what in sound judgement I durst not in
the easiest of those wherein I had been instructed, and wherein the
rashnesse of judging is of no prejudice.  Seeming most impious to me,
to goe about to subject publike constitutions and unmoveable
observances, to the instabilitie of a private fantasie (private reason
is but a private jurisdiction) and to undertake that on divine lawes,
which no policie would tolerate in civill law.  Wherein although man's
reason have much more commerce, yet are they soveraignly judges of
their judges: and their extreme sufficiencie serveth to expound
custome and extend the use that of them is received, and not to divert
and innovate the same.  If at any time divine providence hath gone
beyond the rules to which it hath necessary constrained us, it is not
to give us a dispensation from them.  They are blowes of her divine
hand, which we ought not imitate, but admire: as extraordinarie
examples, markes of an expresse and particular avowing of the severall
kinds of wonders, which for a testimonie of her ominpotencie it
offereth us, beyond our orders and forces, which it is follie and
impietie to goe abont to represent, and which we onght not follow but
contemplate with admiration, and meditate with astonishment.  Acts of
her personage, and not of ours.  Cotta protesteth very opportunely;
Quum de religione agitur, T.  Coruncanium, P.  Scipionem, P.
Scaevolam, Pontifices maximos, non Zenonem, aut Cleanthem, aut
Chrysippum sequor:/1 'When we talke of religion, I follow Titus
Coruncanium, Publius Scipio, P.  Scaevola,

----- 1 CIC.  De.  Nat. 1. iii. c. 2.

and the professors of religion, not Zeno, Cleanthes, or Chrysippus.'
May God know it in our present quarell, wherein are a hundred
articles, yea, great and deepe articles, to be removed and alterd,
although many there are who may boast to have exactly survaid the
reasons and foundations of one and another faction.  It is a number,
if it be a number, that should have no great meane to trouble us.  But
whither goeth all this other throng? Under what colours doth it
quarter itselfe?  It followeth of theirs, as of other weake and ill
applied medicines, the humors that it would have purged in us, it hath
enflamed, exasperated, and sharpned, by her conflict, and still do
remaine in our bodies.  It could not by reason of her weaknesse purge
us, but hath rather weakned us; so that we cannot now void it, and by
her operation we reap nothing but long, continuall, and intestine
griefes and aches, yet is it, that fortune, ever reserving her
authoritie above our discourses, doth sometimes present us the urgent
necessitie, that lawes must need yeeld her some place: And when a man
resisteth the increase of an innovation, brought in by violence, to
keepe himselfe each-where and altogether in rule and bridle against
those that have the keyes of fields, to whom all things are lawfull,
that may in any sort advance their desseigne, that have not law, nor
order, but to follow their advantage, it is a dangerous obligation and
prejudiciall inequalitie.

  Aditum nocendi perfido prostat fides./1


  Trust in th' untrustee, may

  To hurt make open way

For so much as the ordinarie discipline of an estate, that hath his
perfect health, doth not provide for these extraordinarie accidents,
it presupposeth a bodie holding it selfe in his principall members and
offices, and a common consent to observe and obey it.  Lawfull
proceeding is a cold, dull, heavie, and forced proceeding: and is not
like to hold out against a licentious and

----- 1 SEN.  Oed. act. iii. sc. 1.

unbridled proceeding.  It is yet, as all men know, a reproach to those
two great personages, Octavius and Cato, in their civill warres: the
one of Scilla, the other of Caesar, because they rather suffered their
countrie to incur all extremities, than by her lawes to aid her, or to
innovate anything.  For truly in these last necessities, where nothing
is left to take hold by, it were. peradventure better to shrug the
shoulders, stoope the head, and somewhat yeeld to the stroke, than
beyond possibilitie to make head and resist, and be nothing the
better, and give violence occasion to trample all underfoot: and
better were it to force the lawes to desire but what they may, since
they may not what they would.  So did he that ordained them to sleepe
foure and twentie houres: And he who for a time removed one day from
the Calendar: And another who of the moneth of June made a second May.
The Lacedemonians themselves, so strict observers of their countries
ordinances, being urged by their Lawes, which precisely forbid and
inhibited to chuse one man twice to be their Admirall, and on the
other side their affaires necessarily requiring that Lysander should
once more take that charge upon him, they created one Aracus Admirall,
but instituted Lysander superintendent of all maritime causes.  And
with the same sutteltie, one of their Ambassadors being sent to the
Athenians for to obtaine the change of some ordinance, Pericles
alleaging that it was expresly forbid to remove the table wherein a
law had once beene set downe, perswaded him but to turne, for that was
not forbidden.  It is that whereof Plutarke commendeth Philopaemen,
who being borne to command, could not onely command according to the
lawes, but the lawes themselves, whensoever publike necessitie
required it.

CHAPTER 1.XXIII+ DIVERS EVENTS FROM ONE SELFSAME COUNSELL

JAMES AMIOT, great Almoner of France, did once tell me this storie, to
the honour of one of our Princes (and so he was indeed by very good
tokens, albeit by offspring he were a stranger), that during our first
troubles, at the siege of Roane, the said Prince being advertised by
the Queene-mother of a conspiracie and enterprise that should be
attempted against his life, and by letters particularly informed him
of the partie that should performe it, who was a gentleman of Anjow,
or Manse, and who to that purpose did ordinarily frequent the said
Princes court; he never imparted that secret or communicated that
warning to any man, but the next morrow walking upon Saint Catherins
hill, whence our batterie played against the towne (for it was, at
what time we laid siege to Roane) with the said Lord great Almoner and
another Bishop by his side, he chanced to descrie the said gentleman,
whom the Queene-mother had described unto him, and caused him to be
called, who being come before his presence, said thus unto him,
perceiving him alreadie to wax pale and tremble at the alarums of his
conscience: Master, such a one, I am fully perswaded you fore-imagine
what I will charge you with, and your countenance doth plainly shew
it, you can conceale nothing from me: for I am so well instructed of
your businesse that would you goe about to hide it, you should but
marre all, you have perfect knowledge of this and this thing (which
were the chiefest props and devices of the secretest drifts of his
complot and conspiracie) faile not therefore, as you tender your life,
to confesse the truth of all your purpose.' When the silly man saw
himselfe so surprized and convicted (for the whole matter had beene
discovered unto Queene by one of the complices) he had no other way
but to lift up his hands and beg for grace and mercie at the Princes
hands, at whose feete he would have prostrated himselfe, but that he
would not let him: thus following his discourse: 'Come hither my
friend,' said he, 'Did I ever doe you any displeasure?  Have I ever
through any particular hatred wronged or offended any friends of
yours?  It is not yet three weekes since I knew you, what reason might
move you to conspire and enterprise my death?' The gentleman with a
faint trembling voyce, and and self-accusing looke, answered him, that
no particular occasion had ever moved him to that, but the interest of
the general cause of his faction, and that some of them had perswaded
him, that to root out, and in what manner soever, to make away so
great an enemy of their religion, would be an execution full of
pietie, and a worke of supererogation.  Then said the Prince, "I shew
you how much the religion which I profess is more milde than that
whereof you make profession: yours hath perswaded you to kill me,
without hearing me, having never been offended by me: and mine
commands me to pardon you, convicted as you are, that you would so
treacherously and without cause have killed me.  Goe your way,
withdraw your selfe, let me never see you here againe, and if you be
wise, henceforward in your enterprises take honester men for your
counsellers than those of your religion.' The Emperour Augustus being
in Gaule, received certaine advertisement of a conspiracie, that L.
Cinna complotted against him, whereof he purposed to be avenged, and
for that purpose sent to all his friends against the next morrow for
advice and counsell, but passed the fore-going night with great
anxietie and unrest, considering that following his intent, be should
bring a yong Gentleman, well borne, of a noble house, and great
Pompeyes nephew, to his death: which perplexitie produced divers
strange discourses and consideration in him. 'What,' saith he unto
himselfe, 'shall it ever be reported, that I doe live in feare, and
suffer mine enemie to walke at his pleasure and libertie?  Shall he
then goe free, that hath attempted and resolved to deprive me of my
life, which both by sea and land I have saved from so many civill
warres, and from so many battels?  And now that I have stablished an
universall peace in the world, shall he be absolved and goe
unpunished, that hath not only determined to murther, but sacrifice
me?' (For, the complot of the conspiracie was to murther him when he
should be at sacrifice.) After that, having taken some rest with
himselfe, he with a lowder voice began to exclaime and cry out against
himselfe, saying, 'Why livest thou, if the lives of so many depend on
thy death?  Shall thy vengeance and cruelties never have an end?  Is
thy life of that worth, as it may countervaile the sundry mischiefes
that arelike to ensue, if it be preserved?' Livia his wife being in
bed with him, perceiving his agonie and hearing his speeches, saith
thus unto him: 'And may not womens counsells be admitted?  Doe as
Physitians are wont, wbo when their ordinairie receipts will not
worke, have recourse to the contrarie.  Hitherto thou couldest never
doe any good with severitie: Lepidus hath followed Savidienus Murena
Lepidus, Coepio Murena, Egnatius Scoepio; begin now to prove what a
good lenitie and clemencie will doe thee: Cinna is convicted, pardon
him: To annoy or hurt thee now he is not able, and thou shalt thereby
increase thy glory.' Augustus seemed very glad to have found an
Advocate of his humour, and having thanked his wife, and countermanded
his friends whom he had summoned to the Counsell, commanded Cinna to
be brought before him alone.  Then sending all men out of his chamber,
and a chaire prepared for Cinna to sit in, he thus bespoke him:
'First, Cinna, I require to have a gentle audience, and that thou wilt
not interrupt my speech, which ended, I will give thee time and
leasure to answer me: Thou knowest (oh Cinna) that when I had taken
thee prisoner in mine enemies campe, who wast not only become, but
borne my foe; I saved thee, then put thee in quiet possession of thy
goods, and at last, have so enriched thee, and placed thee in so high
a degree, that even the conquerours are become envious over the
conquered. The Priests office, which thou beggedst at my hands, I
freely bestowed on thee, having first refused the same to others,
whose fathers and friends had in many battels shed their bloud for me:
After all which benefits, and that I had in dutie tied thee so fast
unto me, thou hast notwithstanding undertaken to kill me.' To whom
Cinna replied, crying alowd, 'That he had never so much as conceived
so wicked a thought, much lesse entertained the same.' 'Oh Cinna, this
is not according to thy promise,' answered then Augustus, 'which was
that thou wouldest not interrupt me: What I say is true, thou hast
undertaken to murther me in such a place on such a day, in such a
company. and in such manner:' and seeing him so amazed in heart, and
by his evidence strucken dumbe, moved thereunto, not by the condition
of his promise, but by the guilt of his selfe-accusing conscience;
'why wouldest thou doe it,' replied he, 'is it because thou wouldest
be Emperour? Truly the commonwealth is but in hard condition, if none
but myselfe hinder thee from the Empire.  Thou canst not so much as
defend thine owne hous and didst but lately lose a processe only by
the favor of a seely libertine. What, hast thou no meane of power in
any other matter, but to attempt Caesars life?  I quit it, if there he
no man but my selfe to impeach thy hopes. Supposest thou that Paulus,
that Fabius, that the Cossenians, or the Servillianes will ever permit
thee?  And so great a troupe of noble men, noble not only in name, but
such as by their virtues honour their nobilitie, will ever suffer it?'
After many other such like discourses (for he talked with him more
than two houres) he said unto him: 'Away, oh China, that life which
once I gave thee, as to an enemie, I now give thee againe, as to a
traitour and a patricide: let a true friendship+ from this day forward
begin betweene us, let us strive together which of us two with a
better faith shall out-goe the other, and whether I have given thy
life, or thou hast received the same with great confidence:' and so
left him.  Shortly after he gave him the Consulship, blaming him that
he durst not aske it of him.  And ever after held him as his deere
friend, and made him alone heire and executor of his goods.  Now after
this accident, which hapned to Augustus in the xl yeare of his age,
there was never any conspiracie or enterprise attempted against him;
and he received a just reward for his so great clemency.  But the like
succeeded not to one Prince, for his mildnesse and lenitie could not
so warrant him, but that afterward he fell into the snares of the like
treason: so vaine and frivolous a thing is humane wisdome: and
contrary to all projects, devices, counsels and precautions, fortune+
doth ever keepe a full sway and possession of all events.  We count
those Physitians happy and successful, that successfully end a
desperate cure, or come to a good issue: as if there were no other art
but theirs, that could not subsist of itselfe, and whose foundations
were too feeble to stand and relie upon her owne strength: and as if
there were none but it, that stands in need of fortunes
helpe-affoording hand, for the effecting of her operations.  My
conceit of it is, both the worst and the best a man may imagine: for,
thankes be to God, there is no commerce betweene us: I am contrary to
others: for I ever despise it, and when I am sick, instead of entring
into league or composition with it, I then beginne to hate and feare
it most: and answer such as urge mee to take Physicke, that at least
they will tarie till such time as I have recovered my health and
strength againe; that then I may the better be enabled to endure the
violence and hazard of their potions. I let nature worke, and
presuppose unto my selfe that she hath provided her selfe, both of
teeth and clawes, to defend her self from such assaults as shall beset
her, and to maintaine this contexture or frame, whose dissolution it
so much hateth.  In liew of bringing helpe unto her when shee most
striveth, and is combated by sicknesse I greatly feare lest I bring
succor unto her adversarie, and surcharge her with new enemies.  Now I
conclude, that not onely in Physicke, but likewise in sundry more
certaine arts, fortune+, hath great share in them.  The Poeticall
furies, which ravish and transport their Author beyond himselfe, why
shall we not ascribe them to his good fortune, since himselfe
confesseth that they exceed his strength and sufficiencie, and
acknowledgeth to proceed from elsewhere than from himselfe, and that
they are not in his power, no more than Orators say to have those
strange motions and extraordinary agitations, that in their art
transport them beyond their purpose?  The like wee see to bee in
painting, for sometimes the Painters hand shall draw certaine lines or
draughts, so farre exceeding his conception or skill, that himselfe is
forced to enter into admiration and amazement.  But fortune yet doth
much more evidently shew the share shee hath in all their workes, by
the graces and beauties that often are found in them, not onely beyond
the intent, but besides the very knowledge of the workman.  A heedy
Reader shall often discover in other mens compositions, perfections
farre differing from the Authors meaning, and such as haply he never
dreamed of, and illustrateth them with richer senses and more
excellent constructions.  As for military enterprises, no man is so
blinde but seeth what share fortune hath in them : even in our
counsels and deliberations, some chance or good lucke must needs be
joyned to them, for whatsoever our wisdome can affect is no great
matter.  The sharper and quicker it is, more weaknesse findes it in it
selfe, and so much the more doth it distrust it selfe.  I am of
Sillaes opinion: and when I nearest consider the most glorious
exploits of warre, me thinkes I see, that those who have the conduct
of them, employ neither counsell nor deliberation about them, but for
fashion-sake, and leave the best part of the enterprise to fortune,
and on the confidence they have in her ayd, they still go beyond the
limits of all discourse.  Casuall rejoycings, and strange furies ensue
among their deliberations, which for the most induce them to take the
counsell least grounded upon apparance or reason, and which quaile
their courage beyond reason; whence it hath succeeded unto divers
great Captaines, by giving credit to such rash counsels; and alleaging
to their souldiers, that by some divine inspiration, and other signes
and prognostications, they were encouraged to such and such
enterprises.  Loe here wherefore in this uncertaintie and perplexitie,
which the impuissances and inabilitie doth bring us to see and chuse
what is most commodious for the difficulties which the divers
accidents and circumstances of everie thing draw with them: the surest
way, if other considerations did not invite us thereto, is, in my
conceit, to follow the partie, wherein is most honestie+ and justice;
and since a man doubteth of the nearest way, ever to keepe the right.
As in these two examples I have lately mentioned, there is no doubt
but that it was more commendable and generous in him who had received
the offence+, to remit and pardon+ the same, than to have done
otherwise.  If the first had but ill-successe, his good intent is not
to be blamed; and no man knoweth, had be taken the contrary way,
whether he should have escaped the end, to which destinie called him;
and then had he lost the glorie and commendations of so seld-seene
humanitie.  Sundrie men possessed with this feare, are read-of in
ancient Histories; the greatest part of which have followed the way of
fore-running the conspiracies which were complotted against them, by
revenge or tortures, but I see very few, that by this remedy have
received any good; witnesse so many Romane Emperours.  Hee that
perceiveth himselfe to be in this danger ought not much to relie upon
his power, or hope in his vigilancie.  For, how hard a matter is it
for a man to warrant and safeguard himselfe from an enemie, that masks
under the visage of the most officious and heartie-seeming friend we
have?  And to know the inward thoughts and minde-concealed meanings of
such as daily attend, and are continually with us?  It will little
availe him to have foraine nations to his guard, and ever to be
encircled about with troupes of Armed men? whosoever he be that
resolveth to condemne his owne life, may at any time become Master of
other mens lives.  Moreover, that continuual suspicion which makes the
Prince to mistrust every body, should be a wonderfull vexation to his
minde. And therefore when Dion was advertised that Calippus watched to
kill him, could never finde in his heart to informe himselfe of it:
affirming: 'He had rather die once, than ever live in feare and
miserie, and to guard himselfe not onely from his enemies, but from
his very friends.' Which thing Alexander presented more lively and
undantedly by effect, who by a letter of Parmenio having received
advertisement that Philip, his neerest and best regarded Physitian,
had with money beene suborned and corrupted by Darius to poison him,
who at the very instant that he gave Philip the letter to reade,
swallowed downe a potion he had given him: was it not to express his
resolution, that if his friends would kill him he would not shun them,
but consent to their treachery?  This Prince is the Soveraigne
patterne of hazardous attempts: yet know I not whether in all his life
he shewed an act of more resolute constancie+ than this, nor an
ornament so many wayes famous.  Those which daily preach and buzze in
Princes eares, under colour of their safetie, a heedy diffidence and
everwarie distrustfulnesse, doe nought but tell them of their ruine,
and further their shame and downefall. No noble act is atchieved
withoutdanger+.  I know one by his owne complexion, of a right martial
courage and ready for any resolution, whose good and hopefull fortune
is dayly corrupted by such verball perswasion; as first to keepe close
with his friends; never to listen to any reconciliation with his old
enemies: to stand upon his owne guard; never to commit himselfe to any
stronger than himselfe, what faire promise soever they make him, or
whatsoever apparant profit they seeme to containe. {caution+} I also
know another, who because he did ever follow the contrarie counsell,
and would never listen to such schoole- reasons, hath beyond all hope
raised his fortune above the common reach. That boldnesse wherewith
they so greedily gape after glory, is alwayes at hand, when ever need
shall be, as gloriously in a doublet as in an armour; in a cabinet as
in a campe; the arme held downe, as lifted up.  A wisedome so tenderly
precise, and so precisely circumspect, is a mortall enemie to haughty
executions. {revenge+} Scipio, to sound the depth of Siphax intent,
and to discover his minde; leaving his armie, and abandoning the yet
unsetled country of Spaine, which under his new conquest of it was
likely to be suspected, he, I say, could passe into Affrike onely with
two simple ships or small barkes, to commit himselfe in a strange and
foe countrie, to engage his person, under the power of a barbarous
King, under an unknowne faith, without either hostage or letters of
credence, yea, without any body, but onely upon the assurance of the
greatnesse of his courage, of his successeful good fortune, and of the
promise of his high- raised hopes.  Habita fides ipsam plerumque fidem
obligat: 'Most commonlytrusting+ obligeth trustinesse.' To an
ambitious and fame aspiring minde, contrariwise, a man must yeeld
little, and cary a hard hand against suspicions: Feare and distrust
draw on offences and allure them.  The most mistrustful of our Kings
established his affaires, and setled his estate, especially because he
had voluntarily given over, abandoned and committed his life and
liberty, to the hands and mercy of his enemies: Seeming to put his
whole confidence in them, that so they might likewise conceive
an,undoubted affiance in him.  Caesar did onely confront his mutinous
legions, and oppose his hardly-ruled Armies, with the minde-quelling
authoritie of his countenance, and awe-moving fiercenesse of his
words: and did so much trust himselfe and his fortune, that he no whit
feared to abandon and commit himselfe to a seditious and rebellious
Armie.

       ----- stetit aggere fultu

  Cespitis, intrepidus vultu, meritqu timer

  Nil metuens./1


  He on a rampart stood of turfe upreard

  Fearlesse and following none, was to be fear'd.

True it is, that this undaunted assurance cannot so fully and lively
be represented, but by those in whom the imagination or apprehension
of death+, and of the worst that may happen, can strike no amazement
at all: for, to represent it fearfully-trembling, doubtful and
uncertaine, for the service of an important reconciliation, is to
effect no great matter: It is an excellent motive to gaine the heart
and good will of others, for a man to go and submit himselfe to them,
provided it be done freely, and without constraint of any necessitie,
and in such sort that a man bring a pure and unspotted confidence with
him, and at least his countenance void of all scruple. {Antonio+}
Being yet a childe, I saw a gentleman who had the command of a great
Citie, and by a commotion. of a seditiously furious people greatly put
to his plunges, who to suppresse the rising fire of his tumult,
resolved to sally out from a strongly assured place, where he was
safe, and yeeld himselfe to that many-headed monster mutinous rowt;
thrived so ill by it that he was miserably slaine amongst them: yet
deeme I not this oversight to have beent so great in issuing out, his
memorie being of most men condemned, as because he tooke away his
submission and remissenesse, and attempted to exunguish that rage and
hurly-burly rather by way of following than of guiding, and by
requiring sute than by demonstrative resolution; and I deeme, a
gratiously milde severetie, with a militaire commandement, full of
confidence and securitie, beseeming his ranke and the dignitie of his
charge, had better availed him, had become more successfull, at least
with more honour, and well-seeming comlinesse.  There is nothing lesse
to bee expected or hoped for at the hands of this monstrous faced
multitude, thus agitated by furie, than humanitie and gentlenesse; it
will much

----- 1 LUCAN. 1. iii. 296.

sooner receive reverence and admit feare.  I might also blame him,
that having undertaken a resolution (in my judgment, rather brave than
rash) to caste himselfe inconsiderately, weake and unarmed, amidst a
tempestuous ocean of senselesse and mad men, he should have gone
through stitch with it, and not leave the person he represented in the
briers, whereas after he had perceived the danger at hand, he chanced
to bleed at the nose; and then to change that demisse and flattering
countenance he had undertaken into a dismaid and drooping looke,
filling both voice and eyes with astonishment and repentance: and
seeking. to squat himselfe, hee the more enflamed and called them upon
him.  It was determined there should be a generall muster made of
divers troupes of armed men (a place fittest for secret revenges, and
where they may safest be achieved) there were most apparent reasons,
that the place was very unsure, or at least, to be suspected, by such
as were to have the principall and necessary charge to survey them.
Divers counsels were proposed, sundry opinions heard, as in a subject
of great difficultie, and on which depended so many weightie
consequences.  My advice was, they should carefully avoid to give any
testimonie of suspition or shew of doubt, and that our troupes should
be as full as might be, and the Fyles orderly ranked, and every
Souldier shew an undaunted carriage and undismayed countenance, and
instead of keeping some of our forces backe (which thing most opinions
aimed at) all Captaines should he put in minde to admonish their
Souldiers to make their sallies as orderly and as strong as might be,
in honour of the assistance; and spare no powder, which would serve as
a gratification toward these suspectfull troupes, which afterward
caused a mutuall and profitable confidence.  I finde the course that
Julius Caesar held to be the best a man may take: First he assayed by
clemencie to purchase the love of his very enemies, contenting
himselfe in the conspiracies that were discovered unto him, simply to
shew they were not unknowne to him, but, had perfect notice of them.
That done, he tooke a most noble resolution, which was, without dread
or dismay, or any care- taking, to attend whatsoever might betide him,
wholy abandoning and remitting himselfe into the hands of the Gods and
of fortune.  For certainely, it is the state wherein he was, when he
was murthered in the Senate.  A stranger having published ere that he
could teach Dionysius the tyrant of Siracusa a way to understand and
discover the very certaintie of all the practices his subjects or any
else should practise against him, if he could bestowe a good summe of
money upon him: Dionysius being thereof advertised, sent for him, to
discover the secret, and understand the truth of so necessarie an art
for this preservation: the stranger told him, there was no other skill
in his art, but that he should deliver him a talent, and then boast
hee had learned the use of so unvaluable a secret of him. Dionysius
allowed of his invention, and forthwith caused six hundred crownes to
be delivered him.  It is not likely that ever he would have given so
great a summe of mony to an unknowne man, but in reward of a most
profitable instruction; for by way of this reputation he kept his
enemies still in awe.  And therefore doe Princes wisely publish such
advertisements as they receive of the plots conspired, and treasons
practised against their lives and states, thereby to make men beleeve,
that nothing can be attempted against them, but they shall have
knowledge of it.  The Duke of Athens committed many fond oversights in
the establishing of his late tyrannie upon the Florentines, but this
the chiefest, that having received the first advertisement of the
Monopolies and Complots the Florentines contrived ahainst him, by
Mathew, surnamed Morozo, one of the complices, thinking to suppresse
this warning, and conceale that any in the Citie were offended at him,
or grudged at his rule, caused him immediately to be put to death.  I
remember to have heretofore read the storie of a Romane (a man of
speciall dignitie) who flying the tyrannie of the Triumvirate, had
many times by the sutteltie of his invention, escaped those who
pursued him.  It fortuned upon a day, that a troupe of horse-men, who
had the charge to apprehend him, passing alongst a hedge under which
he lay lurking, had well-nigh discovered him; which he perceiving, and
considering the dangers and difficulties he had so long endured,
thinking to save himselfe from the continuall and daily searches that
every where were made after him, and calling to minde the small
pleasure he might hope of such a life, and how much better it were for
him to die at once than live in such continuall feare and agonie,
himselfe called them, and voluntarily discovered his lurking hole, and
that he might rid them and himselfe from further pursuit and care, did
willingly yeeld unto their crueltie.  For a man to call his enemies to
aid him, is a counsell somewhat rash, yet thinke I it were better to
embrace it, then remaine still in the continuall fit of such a fever
that hath no remedie.  But since the provisions of man may apply unto
it, are full of unquietnesse and uncertaintie, much better is it with
a full assurance to prepare himselfe patiently to endure whatsoever
may happen, and draw some comfort from that which a man is never sure
shall come to passe.

CHAPTER 1.XXIV+ OF PEDANTISME

I HAVE in my youth oftentimes beene vexed to see a Pedant+ brought in,
in most of Italian comedies, for a vice or sport-maker, and the
nicke-name of Magister to be of no better signification amongst us.
For, my selfe being committed to their tuition, how could I chuse but
he somewhat jealous of their reputation?  In deed I sought to excuse
them by reason of the naturall disproportion that is betweene the
vulgar sort, and rare and excellent men, both in judgment and
knowledge: forsomuch as they take a cleane contrarie course one from
another.  But when I considered the choysest men were they that most
contemned them, I was far to seeke, and as it were lost my selfe:
witnesse our good Belay:

  Mais je hay par sur tout un scavoir pedantesque./1


  A pedant knowledge,

  Detest out of all cry.

Yet is this custome very ancient; for Plutarch saith that Greeke and
Scholer were amongst the Romans words of reproach and reputation.  And
coming afterwards to yeares of more discretion, I have found they had
great reason, and that magis magnos clericos, non sunt magis magnas
sapientes: 'The most great Clerkes are not the most wisest men.' But
whence it may proceed, that a minde rich in knowledge, and of so many
things, becommeth thereby never livelier nor more quickesighted; and a
grose-headed and vulgar spirit may

----- 1 BELLAY.

without amendment containe the discourse and judgement of the most
excellent wits the world ever produced, I still remaine doubtfull.  To
receive so many, so strange, yea and so great wits, it must needs
follow (said once a Lady unto me, yea one of our chiefest Princesses,
speaking of somebody) that a man's owne wit, force, droops, and as it
were diminishes it selfe, to make roome for others.  I might say, that
as plants are choked by over-much moisture, and lampe dammed with too
much oyle, so are the actions of the mind over-whelmed by
over-abundance of matter and studie: which occupied and intangled with
so great a diversitie of things, loseth the meane to spread and cleare
it selfe and that surcharge keepeth it low- drooping, and faint.  But
it is otherwise, for our mind stretch the more by how much more it is
replenished.  And in examples of former times, the contrary is seene,
of sufficient men in the managing of publike affaires, of great
Captaines, and notable Counsellers in matters of estate, to have been
therewithall excellently wise.  And concerning Philosophers, retired
from all publike negotiations, they have indeed sometimes been
vilified by the comike libertie of their times, their opinions and
demeanors yeelding them ridiculous. Will you make them Judges of the
right of a processe, or of the actions of a man?  They are readie for
it.  They enquire whether there be any life yet remaining, whether any
motion.  Whether man be any thing but an Oxe, what working or
suffering is; what strange beasts law and justice are. Speake they of
the Magistrate, or speake they unto him; they do it with an unreverent
and uncivill libertie.  Heare they a Prince or a King commended? Hee
is but a shepherd to them, as idle as a Swaine busied about milking of
his cattell, or shearing of his sheepe: but more rudely.  Esteeme you
any man for possessing two hundred acres of land?  They scoffe at him,
as men accustomed to embrace all the world as their possession.  Do
you boast of your Nobilitie, because you can blazon your descent of
seven or eight rich Grandafthers?  They will but little regard you, as
men that conceive not the universall image of nature, and how many
predecessors every one of us hath had, both rich and poore, Kings and
groomes, Greekes and Barbarians.  And were you lineally descended in
the fiftieth degree from Hercules, they deeme it a vanitie to vaunt or
allege this gift of fortune+.  So did the vulgar sort disdaine them as
ignorant of the first and common things, and as presumptuous and
insolent.  But this Platonicall lustre is far from that which our men
stand in need of.  They were envied as being beyond the common sort,
as despising publike actions, as having proposed unto themselves a
particular and inimitable life, aiming and directed at certam high
discourses, and from the common use; these are disdained as men beyond
the ordinary fashion, as incapable of publike charges, as leading an
unsociable life, and professing base and abject customes, after the
vulgar kind.  Odi homines ignavos opere, Philosophos sententia:/1 'I
hate men that are fooles in working, and Philosophers in speaking.' As
for those Philosophers, I say, that as they were great in knowledge,
so were they greater in all action.  And even as they report of that
Syracusan Geometrician, who being taken from his bookish contemplation
to shew some practice of his skill, for the defence of his countrie
reared sodainly certaine terror-moving engines, and shewed effects
farre exceeding all mens conceit, himselfe notwithstanding disdaining
all this his handieworke, supposing he had thereby corrupted the
dignitie of his art; his engines and manuall works being but the
apprentiships, and trials of his skill in sport: So they, if at any
time they have been put to the triall of any action, they have been
seen to flie so high a pitch, and with so lofty a flight, that men
might apparently see their minds and spirits were through the
intelligence of things become wonderfully rich and great.  But some
perceiving the seat of politike government possessed by unworthy and
incapable men, have withdrawne themselves from it.  And hee who

----- 1 PACUVIUS, Lips. 1. i. c. x.

demanded of Crates, how long men should Philosophize, received this
answer, 'Untill such time as they who have the conduct of our Armies
be no longer blockish asses.' Heraclitus resigned the royaltie unto
his brother.{Prospero+} And to the Ephesians, who reproved him for
spending his time in playing with children before the temple he
answered, 'And is it not better to doe so, than to governe the publike
affaires in your companie?' Others having their imagination placed
yond fortune and the world, found the seat of justice, and the thrones
of Kings, to be but base and vile. And Empedocles refused the royaltie
which the Agrigentines offered him. Thales sometimes accusing the
carke and care men tooke about good busbandry, and how to grow rich;
some replied unto him, that he did as the Fox, because he could not
attaine unto it himselfe; which hearing, by way of sport he would
needs shew by experience how he could at his pleasure become both
thriftie and rich; and bending his wits to gaine and profit, erected a
traffike, which within one yeare brought him such riches as the
skilfullest in trade of thriving could hardly in all their life devise
how to get the like.  That which Aristotle reporteth of some who
called both him and Anaxagoras, and such like men, wise and not
prudent, because they cared not for things more profitable: besides, I
doe not verie well digest this nice difference of words that serveth
my find-fault people for no excuse: and to see the base and needie
fortune wherewith they are content, we might rather have just cause to
pronounce them neither wise nor prudent.  I quit this first reason,
and thinke it better to say, that this evill proceedeth from the bad
course they take to follow sciences; and that respecting the manner we
are instructed in them, it is no wonder if neither Schollers nor
Masters, howbeit they may prove more learned become no whit more
sufficient.  Verily the daily care and continuall charges of our
fathers aymeth at nothing so much as to store our heads with knowledge
and- learning; as for judgement and virtue, that is never spoken of.
If a man passe by, crie out to our people: 'Oh what a wise man goeth
yonder!' And of another: 'Oh what a good man is yonder!' he will not
faile to cast his eyes and respect toward the former.  A third crier
were needfull, to say, 'Oh what blocke-heads are those!' We are ever
readie to aske, 'Hath he any skill in the Greeke and Latine tongue?
can he write well? doth hee write in prose or verse?' But whether hee
be growne better or wiser, which should be the chiefest of his drift,
that is never spoken of.  We should rather enquire who is better wise
than who is more wise.  We labour, and toyle, and plod to fill the
memorie, and leave both understanding and conscience emptie. Even as
birds flutter and skip from field to field to pecke up corne, or any
graine, and without tasting the same, carrie it in their bils,
therewith to feed their little ones; so doe our pedants gleane and
picke learning from bookes, and never lodge it further than their
lips, only to degorge and cast it to the wind.  It is strange how
fitly sottishnesse takes bold of mine example.  Is not that which I
doe in the greatest part of this composition, all one and selfe same
thing?  I am ever heere and there picking and culling, from this and
that booke, the sentences that please me, not to keepe them (for I
have no store-house to reserve them in) but to transport them into
this: where, to say truth, they are no more mine than in their first
place: we are (in mine opinion) never wise, but by present learning,
not by that which is past, and as little by that which is to come.
But which is worse, their Schollers and their little ones are never a
whit the more fed or better nourished: but passeth from hand to hand,
to this end only, thereby to make a glorious shew, therewith to
entertaine others, and with it's help to frame some quaint stories, or
prettie tales, as of a light and counterfeit coyne unprofitable for
any use or imployment, but to reckon and cast accompts.  Apud alios
loqui didicerunt, non ipsi secum.  Non est loquendum, sed
gubernandum:/1 'They have learned to speake with others, not with

----- 1 SEN.  Epist. cviii.

themselves: speaking is not so requisite as government.' Nature, to
shew that nothing is savage in whatsoever she produceth, causeth
oftentimes, even in rudest and most unarted nations, productions of
spirits to arise, that confront and wrestle with the most artist
productions.  As concerning my discourse, is not the Gaskonie
proverbe, drawne from a bagpipe, prettie and quaint?  Bouha prou
houha, mas a remuda lous dits qu'em: You may blow long enough, but if
once you stirre your fingers, you may go seeke.' Wee can talke and
prate, Cicero saith thus, These are Platoes customes, These are the
verie words of Aristotle; but what say we our selves? what doe we?
what judge we?  A Peroquet would say as much.  This fashion puts me in
mind of that rich Romane, who to his exceeding great charge had beene
verie industrious to finde out the most sufficient men in all
sciences, which he continually kept about him, that if at any time
occasion should bee moved amongst his friends to speake of any matter
pertaining to Schollership, they might supplie his place, and be
readie to assist him: some with discourse, some with a verse of Homer,
othersome with a sentence, each one according to his skill or
profession; who perswaded himselfe that all such learning was his
owne, because it was contained in his servants minds.  As they doe
whose sufficiencie is placed in their sumptuous libraries.  I know
some, whom if I aske what he knoweth, hee will require a booke to
demonstrate the same, and durst not dare to tell me that his
posteriors are scabious, except he turne over his Lexicon to see what
posteriors and scabious is. Wee take the opinions and knowledga of
others into our protection, and that is all; I tell you they must be
enfeoffed in us, and made our owne. Wee may verie well be compared
unto him, who having need of fire, should goe fetch some at his
neigbbours chimney, where finding a good fire, should there stay to
warme himselfe, forgetting to carrie some home.  What availes it us to
have our bellies full of meat, if it be not digested?  If it bee not
transchanged in us? except it nourish, augment, and strengthen us. We
may imagine that Lucullus, whom learning made and framed so great a
captaine without experience, would have taken it after our manner?  We
relie so much upon other mens armes, that we disanull our owne
strength.  Will I arme my selfe against the fear of death+? it is at
Seneca's cost: will I draw comfort either for my selfe, or any other?
I borrow the same of Cicero.  I would have taken it in my selfe, had I
been exercised unto it: I love not this relative and begd-for
sufficiencie.  Suppose we may be learned by other mens learning.  Sure
I am we can never be wise but by our owne wisdome.

  M,@r. oux a@TZ aocerl


  That wise man I cannot abide

  That for himselfe cannot provide.

Ex quo Ennius: Nequidquam sapere sapientem, qui ipso ibi prodesse non
quiret./2 'Whereupon saith Ennius: That wise man is vainly wise, who
could not profit himselfe.'  -

  ----

  cupidus, s

  Vanuqs et Euganea quantumvis mollior aqna./3


  If covetous, if vaine (not wise

  Than any lambe more base, more nice.

Non enim paranda nobis solum, sed fruenda sapientia est:/4 'For wee
must not only purchase wisdome, but enjoy and employ the same.'
Dionysius scoffeth at those Gramarians, who ploddingly labour to know
the miseries of Ulysses, and are ignorant of their owne; mocketh those
musitians that so attentively tune their instruments, and never accord
their manners; derideth those orators that study to speake of justice,
and never put it in execution. Except our mind be the better, unless
our judgement be the sounder, I had rather my scholler had imployed
his time in playing at tennis; I am sure his bodie would be the
nimbler.  See but one of these

----- 1 Proverb.  Iamb. 2 ENNIUS. 3 JUV.  Sat. viii. 14. 4 CIC.
Finib. 1. i. p.

our universitie men or bookish schollers returne from schole, after he
hath there spent ten or twelve years under a pedanvs charge: who is so
inapt for any matter? who so unfit for any companie? who so to seeke
if he come into the world? all the advantage you discover in him is
that his Latine and Greeke have made him more sottish, more stupid,
and more presumptuous, than before he went from home. {pedant+}
Whereas he should return with a mind full-fraught, he retures with a
wind-puft conceit: instead of plum- feeding the same, he has only
spunged it up with vanitie.  These masters, as Plato speaketh of
sophisters (their cosin Germanes) of all men, are those that promise
to be most profitable unto men, and alone, amongst all, that not only
amend not what is committed to their charge as doth a carpenter or a
mason, but empaire and destroy the same, and yet they must full
dearely be paied.  If the law which Protagoras proposed to his
disciples, were followed, which was, that either they should a pay him
according to his word, or sweare in the temple how much they esteemed
the profit they had received by his discipline, and accordingly
satisfy him for his paines, my pedagogues would be aground, especially
if they would stand to the oath of my experience.  My vulgar
Perigordian speech doth verie pleasantly terme such selfe-conceited
wizards, letter ferits, as if they would say letter-strucked men, to
whom (as the common saying is) letters have given a blow with a
mallet.  Verily for the most part they seeme to be distracted even
from common sense.  Note but the plaine busbandman, or the unwilie
shoemaker, and you see them simply and naturally plod on their course,
speaking only of what they know, and no further; whereas these
letter-puft pedants, because they would faine raise themselves aloft,
and with their litterall doctrine which floteth up and downe the
superficies of their braine, arme themselves beyond other men, they
uncessantly intricate and entangle themselves: they utter loftie
words, and speake golden sentences, but so that another man doth
place, fit, and applie them.  They are acquainted with Galen, but know
not the disease.  They will stuffe your head with lawes, when God wot
they have not yet conceived the ground of the case.  They knowe the
theorike of all things, but you must seeke who shall put it in
practice.  I have seene a friend of mine, in mine owne house, who by
way of sport talking with one of these pedanticall gulls,
counterfeited a kind of fustian tongue, and spake a certaine gibrish,
without rime or reason, sans head or foot, a hotch-potch of divers
things, but that he did often enterlace it with inke-pot termes,
incident to their disputations, to ammuse the bookish sot for a whole
day long with debating and contending; ever thinking he answered the
objections made unto him; yet was he a man of letters and reputation,
a graduate, and wore a goodly formall long gowne.

  Vos, o patritius sanguis, quos vivere par es

  Ooccipiti caeco, posticae occurrite sannae


  You noble blouds, who with a noddle blin

  Should live, meet with the mocke that's made behind.

Whosoever shall narrowly looke into this kind of people, which far and
wide hath spred it selfe, he shall find (as I have done) that for the
most part they neither understand themselves nor others, and that
their memorie is many times sufficiently full fraught, but their
judgment ever hollow and emptie: except their natural inclination have
of it selfe otherwise fashioned them.  As I have seene Adrianus
Turnebus who having never professed any thing but studie and letters,
wherein he was, in mine opinion, the worthiest man that lived these
thousand yeares, and who notwithstanding had no pedanticall thing
about him but the wearing of his gowne, and some externall fashions
that could not well be reduced, and incivilized to the courtiers cut;
things of no consequcnce.  And I naturally hate our people, that will
more hardly endure a long robe uncuriously worne, than a crosse
skittish mind: and that observe

----- PERS.  Sat. i. 61.

what leg, or reverence he makes, note his garbe or demeanor, view his
boots or his hat, and marke what manner of man he is.  For his inward
parts, I deeme him to have been one of the most unspotted and truly
honest minds that ever was.  I have sundry times of purpose urged him
to speak of matters furthest from his study, wherein he was so
cleare-sighted, and could with so quicke an apprehension conceive, and
with so sound a judgment distjnguish them, that he seemed never to
have professed or studied other facultie than warre and matters of
state.  Such spirits, such natures may be termed worthy, goodly, and
solid

         ----- queis arte beingna

  Et meliore luto finxit praecordia Titan:/1


  Whose bowels heavens-bright-Sunne composed

  Of better mold, art wel disposed.

that maintaine themselves against any bad institution.  Now it
sufficeth not that our institution marre us not, it must change us to
the better. There are some of our parliaments and courts, who when
they are to admit of any officers, doe only examine them of their
learning; others, that by presenting them the judgment of some law
cases, endevour to sound their understanding.  Me thinks the latter
keep the better style: And albeit these two parts are necessarie, and
both ought to concur in one, yet truly should that of learning be
lesse prized than judgement, this may well be without the other, and
not the other without this.  For as the Greeke verse saith, ,as o@64V
b A40nacts, ;@ JA@ @059 r-p@./2

  Learning nought worth doth lie

  Be not discretion by.

Whereto serveth learning, if understanding be not joined to it?  Oh
would to God, that for the good of our justice, the societies of
lawyers were as well stored with judgement, discretion and conscience,
as thoy are with learning and wit.  Non vitae, sed scholae
discimus:/3.

----- 1 JUV.  Sat. xiv. 34. 2 Comm.  Graec. w. et 0. ult. 3 SEN.
Epist. cvi. f.

'We learne not for our life, but for the schoole.' It is not enough to
joyne learning and knowledge to the minde, it should be incorporated
into it: it must not be inckled, but dyed with it; and if it change
not and better her estate (which is imperfect) it were much better to
leave it.  It is a dangerous sword, and which hindreth and offendeth
her master, if it be in a weake hand, and which hath not the skill to
manage the same: Vt fuerit melius non didicisse! 'So as it were better
that we had not learned.' It is peradvenulre the cause that neither we
nor divinitie require much learning in women; and that Francis, Duke
of Britannie, sonne to John the fifth, when be was spoken unto for a
marriage betweene him and Isabel a daughter of Scotland; and some told
him she was meanly bronght up and without any instruction of learning,
answered, hee loved her the better for it, and that a woman was wise
enough if she could but make a difference betweene the shirt and
dublet of her husbands.  It is also no such wonder (as some say) that
our auncesters did never make any great accompt of letters, and that
even at this day (except it be by chaunce) they are not often found in
our kings and princes chiefest councels and consultations: And if the
end to grow rich by them {liberal_arts+} which now adaies is
altogether proposed unto us by the studie of law, of Phisicke, of
Pedantisme, and of Divinitie, did not keep them in credit, without
doubt you should see them as beggarly and needy, and as much vilified
as ever they were.  And what hurt I pray you since they neither teach
us to think well nor-doe well?  Postquam docti prodierunt, boni
desunt./1 'Since men became learned, good men failed.' Each other
science is prejudiciall unto him that hath not the science of
goodnesse. {Prospero+} But may not the reason I whilom sought for,
also proceed thence?  That our studie in France, having as it were no
other aime but profit, but those lesse whom nature hath produced to
more generous offices, than lucrative, giving themselves unto
learning, or so briefly (before they have apprehended

----- 1 SEN.  Epist. xciii.

any liking of them, retired unto a profession that hath no communitie
with bookes) there are then none left, altogether to engage themselves
to studie and Bookes, but the meaner kind of people, and such as are
borne to base fortune, and who by learning and letters seek some meane
to live and enrich themselves.  The minds of which people being both
by naturall inclination, by example, and familiar institution, of the
basest stampe doe falsly reap the fruit of learning.  For it is not in
her power to give light unto the mind, that hath none, nor to make a
blind man to see.  The mysterie of it is not to affoord him sight, but
to direct it for him, to addresse his goings, alwaies provided he have
feet of his owne, and good, strait, and capable legs.  Knowledge is an
excellent drug, but no drug is sufficiently strong to preserve it
selfe without alteration or corruption, according to the fault of the
vessell that contained it.  Some man hath a cleare sight, that is not
right-sighted, and by consequence seeth what good is, and doth not
follow it; and seeketh knowledge, but makes no use of it.  The
chiefest ordinance of Plato in his Commonwealth is to give unto his
Citizens their charge according to their nature.  Nature can doe all,
and doth all.  The crookt backt, or deformed, are unfit for any
exercise of the bodie, and crooked and mis-shapen minds unproper for
exercises of the minde.  The bastard and vulgar sort are unworthy of
Philosophie.  When we see a man ill shod, if he chance to be a
Shoomaker, wee say it is no wonder, for commonly none goes worse shod
than they.  Even so it seemes that experience doth often shew us, a
Physitian lesse healthy, a Divine lesse reformed, and most commonly a
Wiseman lesse sufficient than another. Aristo Chius had heretofore
reason to say that Philosophers did much hurt their auditors,
forasmuch as the greatest number of minds are not apt to profit by
such instructions which, if they take not a good, they will follow a
bad course: offcSrovs ex Aristippi, acerbos ex Zenonis Schola exire./1
'They proceed licentious out of

----- 1 CIC.  Nat.  Deor. 1. iii.

the Schoole of Aristippus, but bitter out of the Schoole of Zeno.' In
that excellent institution which Zenophon giveth the Persians, wee
find, that as other nations teach their ohildren Letters, so they
taught theirs vertue.  Plato said the eldest borne sonne, in their
royall succession, was thus taught. 'As soone as he was borne, he was
delivered, not to women, but to such Enmuchs as by reason of their
vertue were in chiefest authoritie about the King.  Their speciall
charge was first to shapen his limmes and bodie, goodly and healthy;
and at seven yeares of age they instructed and inured him to sit on
horsebacke, and to ride a hunting: when he came to the age of
fourteene, they delivered him into the hands of foure men, that is to
say, the wisest, the justest, the most temperate and the most valiant
of all the nation.  The first taught him religion; the second, to be
ever upright and true; the third, to become Master of his owne
desires; and fourth, to feare nothing. {Republic+} It is a thing
worthy great consideration, that in that excellent, and as I may terme
it, matchlesse policie of Lycurgus, and in truth, by reason of her
perfection, monstrous, yet notwithstanding, so carefull for the
education of children, as of her principall charge, and even in the
Muses bosome and resting-place, there is so little mention made of
learning: as if that generous youth disdaining all other yokes but of
vertue, ought only to be furnished, in liew of tutors of learning,
with masters of valour, of justice, of wisdome, and of temperance.  An
example which Plato hath imitated in his Lawes.  The manner of their
discipline was, to propound questions unto them, teaching the
judgement of men and of their actions: and if by way of reason or
discourse they condemned or praised either this man or that deed, they
must be told the truth and best: by which meanes at once they
sharpened their wits, and learned the right. Astiages in Zenophon
calleth Cyrus to an accompt of his last lesson.  It is (saith be) that
a great lad in our Schools, having a little coat, gave it to one of
his fellowes, that was of lesser stature than himselfe, and tooke his
coat from him, which was too big for him: our Master having made me
judge of that difference, I judged that things must be left in the
state they were in, and that both seemed to be better fitted as they
were; whereupon he showed me I had done ill; because I had only
considered the comelinesse where I should chiefly have respected
justice, which required that none should be forced in any thing which
properly belonged to him, and said he was whipt for it, as we are in
our countrie-townes, when we have forgotten the first preterperfect
tense or Aoriste of r@7rTco.  My Regent might long enough make me a
prolixe and cunning Oration in genere demonstrativo, in the oratorie
kind of praise or dispraise, before ever hee should perswade me his
Schoole is worth that.  They have gone about to make the way aborter:
and since Sciences (even when they are right taken) can teach us
nothing but wisdome, honestie, integritie, and resolution; they have
at first sight attempted to put their children to the proper of
effects, and instruct them, not by heare-say, but by assay of action,
lively modelling and framing them not only by precepts and words, but
principally by examples and works, that it might not be a Science in
their mind, but rather his complexion and habitude; not to purchase,
but a naturall inheritance. To this purpose, when Agesilaus was
demanded what his opinion was, children should learne: he answered,
'What they should doe being men.' It is no marvell, if such an
institution have produced so admirable effects.  Some say, that in
other Cities of Greece they went to seeke for Rhetoricians, for
Painters, and for Musicians; whereas in Lacedemon, they sought for
Law-givers, for Magistrates, and Generals of armies: In Athens men
learn'd to say well, but here, to doe well: there to resolve a
sophisticall argument, and to confound the imposture and amphibologie
of words, captiously enterlaced together; here to shake off the
allurements of voluptuousnesse+, and with an undaunted courage to
contemne the threats of fortune, and reject_ the menaces of death:
those busied and laboured themselves about idle words, these after
martiall things: there the tongue was ever in continuall exercise of
speaking, here the minde is an uncessant practice of well-doing. And
therefore was it not Strange, if Antipater requiring fiftie of their
children for hostages, they answered cleane contrarie to that we would
doe, 'that they would rather deliver him twice so many men;' so much
did they value and esteeme the losse of their countries education.
When Agesilaus inviteth Xenophon to send his children to Sparta, there
to be brought up; it is not because they should learne Rhetorike or
Logike, but, as himselfe saith, 'to the end they may learne the
worthiest and best science that may bee, to wit the knowledge how to
obey and the skill how to commmand.' It is a sport to see Socrates,
after his blunt manner, to mocke Hippias, who reporteth unto him what
great summes of money he had gained, especially in certain little
Cities ana small townes of Sicily, by keeping schoole, and teaching
letters, and that at Sparta he could not get a shilling.  That they
were but idiots and foolish people, who can neither measure nor
esteeme nor make no accompt of Grammer, or of Rythmes and who only
ammuse themselves to know the succession of Kings, the establishing
and declination of estates, and such like trash of flim-flam tales.
Which done, Socrates forcing him particularly to allow the excellencie
of their forme of publike government, the happinesse and vertue of
their private life, remits unto him to guesse the conclusion of the
unprofitablenesse of his arts. {liberal_arts+}.  Examples teach us
both in this martiall policie, and in all such like, that the studie
of sciences donth more weaken and effeminate mens minds than
corroborate and adapt them to warre.  The mightiest, yea the best
setled estate, that is now in the world, is that of the Turkes, a
nation equally instructed to the esteeme of armes, and disesteeme of
letters.  I find Rome to have beene most valiant when it was least
learned.  The most warlike nations of our daies are the rudest and
most ignorant.  The Scithians, the Parthians and Tamburlane, serve to
verifie my saying.  When the Gothes over-ran and ravaged Greece; that
which saved all their Libraries from the fire was, that one among them
scattered this opinion, that such trash of bookes and papers must be
untoucht and whole for their enemies, as the only meane and proper
instrument to divert them from all militarie exercises, and ammuse
them to idle, secure, and sedentarie occupations.  When our King
Charles the eight, in a manner without unsheathing his sword, saw
himselfe absolute Lord of the whole Kingdome of Naples, and of a great
part of Tuscanie, the Princes and Lords of his traine ascribed this
sodaine and unhoped for victorie, and facilitie of so noble and
prodigious a conquest, only to this, that most of the Princes and
nobilitie of Italie ammused themselves rather to become ingenious and
wise by learning, than vigorous and warriers by militarie exercises.

CHAPTER 1.XXV+ OF THE INSTITUTION AND EDUCATION OF CHILDREN; TO THE
LADIE DIANA OF FOIX, COUNTESSE OF GURSON

I NEVER knew father, how crooked and deformed soever his sonne were,
that would either altogether cast him off, or not acknowledge him for
his owne: and yet (unlease he be meerely besotted or blinded in his
affection) it may not be said, but he plainly perceiveth his defects,
and hath a feeling of his imperfections.  But so it is, he is his
owne.  So it is in myselfe. I see better than any man else, that what
I have set downe is nought but the fond imaginations of him who in his
youth hath tasted nothing but the paring, and seen but superficies of
true learning: whereof he hath retained but a generall and shapelesse
forme: a smacke of every thing in general, but nothing to the purpose
in particular: After the French manner.  To be short, I know there is
an art of Phisicke; a course of lawes; foure parts of the
Mathematikes; and I am not altogether ignorant what they tend
unto. And perhaps I also know the scope and drift of Sciences in
generall to be for the service of our life. {liberal_arts+} But to
wade further, or that ever I tired my selfe with plodding upon A
ristotle (the Monarch of our moderne doctrine) or obstinately
continued in search of any one science: I confesse I never did it.
Nor is there any one art whereof I am able so much as to draw the
first lineaments. {{PlainDealer+} And there is no scholler (be he of
the lowest forme) that may not repute himselfe wiser than I, who am
not able to oppose him in his first lesson: and if I be forced to it,
I am constrained verie impertinently to draw in matter from some
generall discourse, whereby I examine, and give a guesse at his
naturall judgement: a lesson as much unknowne to them as theirs is to
me.  I have not dealt or had commerce with any excellent booke, except
Plutarke+ or Seneca+, from whom (as the Danaides) I draw my water,
uncessantly filling, and as fast emptying: some thing whereof I fasten
to this paper, but to my selfe nothing at all.  And touching Bookes:
Historie is my chiefe studie, Poesie my only delight, to which I am
particularly affected: for as Cleanthes said, that as the voice being
forciblie pent in the narrow gullet of a trumpet, at last issueth
forth more strong and shriller, so me seemes, that a sentence
cunningly and closely couched in measure-keeping Posie, darts it selfe
forth more furiously, and wounds me even to the quicke.  And
concerning the naturall faculties that are in me (whereof behold here
an essay).  I perceive them to faint under their owne burthen; my
conceits, and my judgement march but uncertaine, and as it were
groping, staggering, and stumbling at every rush: And when I have gone
as far as I can, I have no whit pleased my selfe: for the further I
saile the more land I descrie, and that so dimmed with fogges, and
overcast with clouds, that my sight is so weakned, I cannot
distinguish the same. And then undertaking to speake indifferently of
all that presents it selfe unto my fantasie, and having nothing put
mine owne naturall meanes to imploy therein, if it be my hap (as
commonly it is) among good Authors, to light upon those verie places
which I have undertaken to treat off, as even now I did in Plutarke,
reading his discourse of the power of imagination, wherein in regard
of those wise men, I acknowledge my selfe so weake and so poore, so
dull and grose-headed, as I am forced both to pittie and disdaine my
selfe, yet am I pleased with this; that my opinions have often the
grace to jump with theirs, and that I follow them a loofe-off, and
thereby possesse at least, that which all other men have not; which
is, that I know the utmost difference between them and my selfe: all
which notwithstanding, I suffer my inventions to run abroad, as weake
and faint as I have produced them, without bungling and botching the
faults which this comparison hath discovered to me in them.  A man had
need have a stronge, backe, to undertake to march foot to foot with
these kind of men.  The indiscreet writers of our age, amidst their
triviall compositions, intermingle and wrest in whole sentences taken
from ancient Authors, supposing by such filching-theft to purchase
honour and reputation to themselves, doe cleane contrarie.  For, this
infinite varietie and dissemblance of lustres, makes a face so wan, so
ill-favored, and so uglie, in respect of theirs, that they lose much
more than gaine thereby.  These were two contrarie humours: The
Philosopher Chrisippus was wont to foist- in amongst his bookes, not
only whole sentences and other long-long discourses, but whole bookes
of other Authors, as in one, he brought in Euripides his Medea.  And
Apollodorus was wont to say of him, that if one should draw from out
his bookes what he had stolne from others, his paper would remaine
blanke.  Whereas Epicurus cleane contrarie to him in three hundred
volumes he left behind him, had not made use of one allegation.  It
was my fortune not long since to light upon such a place: I had
languishingly traced after some French words, so naked and hollow, and
so void either of sense or matter, that at last I found them to be
nought but meere French words; and after a tedious and wearisome
travell, I chanced to stumble upon an highe riche and even to the
clouds-raised piece, the descent whereof had it been somewhat more
pleasant or easie, or the ascent reaching a little further, it had
been excusablee and to be borne with-all; but it was such a steepie
downe-fall, and by meere strength hewen out of the maine rocke, that
by reading of the first six words, me thought I was carried into
another world: whereby I perceive the bottome whence I came to be so
low and deep, as I durst never more adventure to go through it; for,
if I did stuffe any one of my discourses with those rich spoiles, it
would manifestly cause the sottishnesse of others to appeare.  To
reprove mine owne faults in others, seemes to me no more insufferable
than to reprehend (as I doe often) those of others in my selfe: They
ought to be accused every where, and have all places of Sanctuarie
taken from them; yet do I know how over boldly, at all times I
adventure to equall my selfe unto my filchings, and so march hand in
hand with them, not without a fond hardie hope, that I may perhaps be
able to bleare the eyes of the Judges from discerning them.  But it is
as much for the benefit of my application, as for the good of my
invention and force.  And I doe not furiously front, and bodie to
bodie wrestle with those old champions: it is but by flights,
advantages, and false offers I seek to come within them, and if I can,
to give them a fall.  I do not rashly take them about the necke, I doe
but touch them, nor doe I go so far as by my bargains I would seeme to
doe; could I but keepe even with them, I should then be an honest man;
for I seek not to venture on them, but where they are strongest. To
doe as I have seen some, that is, to shroud themselves under other
armes, not daring so much as to show their fingers ends unarmed and to
botch up all their works (as it is an easie matter in a common
subject, namely for the wiser sort) with ancient inventions, here and
there hudled up together. And in those who endeavoured to hide what
they have filched from orhers, and make it their owne, it is first a
manifest note of injustice, then a plaine argument of cowardlinesse;
who having nothing of any worth in themselves to make show of, will
yet under the countenance of others sufficiencie goe about to make a
faire offer: Moreover (oh great foolishnesse) to seek by such cosening
tricks to forestall the ignorant approbation of the common sort,
nothing fearing to discover their ignorance to men of understanding
(whose praise only is of value) who will soon trace out such borrowed
ware. As for me, there is nothing I will doe lesse.  I never speake of
others, but that I may the more speake of my selfe.  This concerneth
not those mingle-mangles of many kinds of stuffe, or as the Grecians
call them Rapsodies, that for such are published, of which kind I have
(since I came to yeares of discretion seen divers most ingenious and
wittie; amongst others, one under the name of Capilupus; besides many
of the ancient stampe.  These are wits of such excellence, as both
here and elsewhere they will soone be perceived, as our late famous
writer Lipsius, in his learned and laborious work of the Politikes:
yet whatsoever come of it, for so much as they are but follies, my
intent is not to smother them no more than a bald and hoarie picture
of mine, where a Painter hath drawne not a perfect visage, but mine
owne. For, howsoever, these are but my humors and opinions, and I
deliver them but to show what my conceit is, and not what ought to be
beleeved.  Wherein I ayme at nothing but to display my selfe, who
peradventure (if a new prentiship change me) shall be another to
morrow.  I have no authoritie to purchase beliefe, neither do I desire
it; knowing well that I am not sufficiently taught to instruct orhers.
Some having read my precedent Chapter, told me not long since in mine
owne house, I should somewhat more have extended my selfe in the
discourse concerning the institution of children.  Now (Madam) if
there were any sufficiencie in me touching that subject, I could not
better employ the same than to bestow it as a present upon that little
lad, which ere long threatneth to make a happie issue from out your
honorable woombe: for (Madame) you are too generous to begin with
other than a man childe.  And having had so great a part in the
conduct of your successeful marriage, I may challenge some right and
interest in the greatnesse and prosperitie of all that shall proceed
from it: moreover, the ancient and rightful possession, which you from
time to time have ever had, and still have over my service, urgeth me
with more than ordinarie respects, to wish all honour, wellfare and
advantage to whatsoever may in any sort concerne you and Tours.  And
truly, my meaning is but to show that the greatest difficultie, and
importing all humane knowledge, seemeth to be in this point, where the
nurture and institution of young children is in question.  For as in
matters of husbandrie, the labor that must be used before sowing,
setting; and planting, yea in planting itselfe, is most certaine and
easie.  But when that which was sowen, set and planted, commeth to
take life; before it come to ripenesse, much adoe, and great varietie
of proceeding belongeth to it.  So in men, it is no great matter to
get them, but being borne, what continuall cares, what diligent
attendance, what doubts and feares, doe daily wait to their parents
and tutors, before they can be nurtured and brought to any good?  The
fore-shew of their inclination whilest they are young is so
uncertaine, their humours so variable, their promises so changing,
their hopes so false, and their proceedings so doubtful, that it is
very hard (yea for the wisest) to ground am certaine judgment, or
assured successe upon them.  Behold Cymon, view Themistocles, and a
thousand others, how they have differed, and fallen to better from
themselves, and deceive the expectation of such as knew them.  The
young whelps both of Dogges and Beares at first sight shew their
naturall dispositions but men headIong embracing this custome or
fashion, following that humor or opinion, admitting this or that
passion, allowing of that or this law, are easily changed, and soone
disguised; yet it is hard to force the naturall propension or
readinesse of the minde, whereby it followeth, that for want of heedie
fore-sight in those that could not guide their course well, they often
employ much time in vaine, to addresse young children in those matters
whereunto they are not naturally addicted. All which difficulties
notwithstanding in mine opinion is, to bring them up in the best and
profltablest studies, and that a man should slightly passe over those
fond presages, and deceiving prognostikes, which we over precisely
gather in their infancie.  And (without offence be it said) me thinks
that Plato in his Commonwealth allowed them too-too much authoritie.
Madame, Learning joyned with true knowledge is an especiall and
gracefull ornament, and an implement of wouderfull use and
consequence, namely, in persons raised to that degree of fortune
wherein you are.  And in good truth, learning hath not her owne true
forme, nor can she make shew of her beauteous lineaments, if she fall
into the hands of base and vile persons. [Fore as famous Torquato
Tasso faith: 'Philosophie being a rich and noble Queene, and knowing
her owne worth, graciously smileth upon and lovingly embraceth Princes
and noble men, if they become suiters to her, admitting them as the
minions, and gently affoording them all the favours she can; whereas
upon the contrarie, if she be wooed, and sued unto by clownes,
mechanicall fellowes, and such base kind of people, she holds herselfe
disparaged and disgraced, as holding no proportion with them.  And
therefore see we by experience, that if a true Gentleman or nobleman
follow her with any attention, and wooed her with importunitie, he
shall learne and know more of her, and prove a better scholler in one
yeare, than an ungentle or base fellow shall in seven, though he
pursue her never so attentively.'] She is much more readie and fierce
to lend her furtherance and direction in the conduct of a warre, to
attempt honourable actions, to command a people, to treat a peace with
a prince of forraine nation, than she is to forme an argument in
Logick, to devise a Syllogisme, to canvass a case at the barre or to
prescribe a receit of pills.  So (noble Ladie) forsomuch as I cannot
perswade myselfe, that you will either forget or neglect this point,
concerning the institution of yours, especially having tasted the
sweetnesse thereof, and being descended of so noble and learned a
race.  For we yet possesse the learned compositions of the ancient and
noble Earles of Foix, from out whose heroicke loynes your husband and
you take your ofspring.  And Francis Lord of Candale, your worthie
uncle, doth daily bring forth such fruits thereof, as the knowledge of
the matchlesse qualitie of your house shall hereafter extend itselfe
to, many ages will therefore make you acquainted with one conceit of
mine, which contrarie to the common use I hold, and that is all I am
able to affoord you concerning that matter.  The charge of the Tutor,
which you shall appoint your sonne, in the choice of whom consisteth
the whole substance of his education and bringing up; on which are
many branches depending, which (forasmuch as I can adde nothing of any
moment to it) I will not touch at all.  And for that point, wherein I
presume to advise him, he may so far forth give credit unto it, as he
shall see just cause.  To a gentleman borne of noble parentage, and
heire of a house that aymeth at true learning, and in it would be
disciplined, not so much for gaine or commoditie to himselfe (because
so abject an end is far unworthie the grace and favour of the Muses,
and besides, hath a regard or dependencie of others) nor for externall
shew and ornament, but to adorne and enrich his inward minde, desiring
rather to shape and institute an able and sufficient man, than a bare
learned man; my desire is therefore, that the parents or overseers of
such a gentleman he very circumspect, and careful in chusing his
director, whom I would rather commend for having a well composed and
temperate braine, than a full stuft head, yet both will doe well.  And
I would rather prefer wisdome, judgement, civill customes, and modest
behaviour, than bare and meerly literall learning; and that in his
charge he hold a new course.  Some never cease brawling in their
schollers eares (as if they were still pouring in a tonell) to follow
their booke, yet is their charge nothing else but to repeat what hath
beene told them before.  I would have a tutor to correct this part,
and that at first entrance, according to the capacitie of the wit he
hath in hand, he should begin to make shew of it, making him to have a
smacke of all things, and how to choose and distinguish them, without
helpe of others, sometimes opening him the way, other times leaving
him to open it by himselfe.  I would not have him to invent and speake
alone, but suffer his disciple to speak when his turne commeth.
Socrates, and after him Arcesilaus, made their schollers to speak
first and then would speake themselves.  Obest plerumq ue iis qui
discere volunt, auctoritas eorum qui docent;/1 'Most commonly the
authoritie of them that teach, hinders them that would learne.'  It is
therefore meet that he make him first trot-on before him, whereby he
may the better judge of his pace, and so guesse how long he will hold
out, that accordingly he may fit his strength: for want of which
proportion we often marre all.  And to know how to make a good choice,
and how far forth one may proceed (still keeping a due measure), is
one of the hardest labours I know.  It is a signe of a noble, and
effect of an undanted spirit, to know how to second, and how far forth
he shall condescend to his childish proceedings, and how to guide
them.  As for myselfe, I can better and with more strength walke up
than downe a hill.  Those which, according to our common fashion,
undertake with one selfe-same lesson, and like maner of education, to
direct many spirits of divers formes and different humours, it is no
marvell if among a mulutude of children, they scarce meet with two or
three that reap any good fruit by their discipline, or that come to
any perfection.  I would not only have him to demand an accompt of the
words contained in his lesson, but of the sense and substance thereof,
and judge of the profit he hath made of it, not by the testimonie of
his memorie, but by the witnesse of his life.  That what he lately
learned, he cause him to set forth and pourtray the same into sundrie
shapes, and then to accommodate it to as many different and severall
subjects, whereby he shal perceive, whether he have yet apprehended
the same, and therein enfeoffed himselfe, at due times taking his
instruction from the institution given by Plato. It is a signe of
cruditie and indigestion for a man to yeeld up his meat, even as he
swallowed the same: the stomacke hath not wrought his full operation,
unlesse it have changed forme, and altered fashion of that which was
given him to boyle and concoct.

----- 1 CIC.  De Nat. 1. i.

[Wee see men gape after no reputation but learning, and when they say,
such a one is a learned man, they thinke they have said enough; Our
minde doth move at others pleasure, and tyed and forced to serve the
fantasies of others, being brought under by authoritie, and forced to
stoope to the lure of their bare lesson; wee have beene so subjected
to harpe upon one string, that we have no way left us to descant upon
voluntarie; our vigor and libertie is cleane extinct.  Nunquam tutelae
suae fiunt: 'They never come to their owne tuition.' It was my hap to
bee familiarlie acquainted with an honest man at Pisa, but such an
Aristotelian, as he held this infallible position; that a comformitie
to Aristotles doctrine was the true touchstone and squire of all solid
imaginations and perfect veritie; for, whatsoever had no coherencie
with it, was but fond Chimeraes and idle humors; inasmuch as he had
knowne all, seene all, and said all.  This proposition of his being
somewhat over amply and injuriously interpreted by some, made him a
long time after to be troubled in the inquisition of Rome.  I would
have him make his scholler narrowly to sift all things with
discretion, and harbour nothing in his head by mere authoritie or upon
trust.  Aristotles principles shall he no more axiomes unto him, than
the Stoikes or Epicurians. Let this diversitie of judgements he
proposed unto him, if he can, he shall be able to distinginsh the
truth from falsehood, if not, he will remaine doubtful. {objectivity+}

  Che non men che saper dubbiar m'aggrata./1


  No lesse it pleaseth me

  To doubt, than wise to be.

For if by his owne discourse he embrace the opinions of Xenophon or of
Plato, they shall he no longer theirs, but his.  He that meerely
followeth another, traceth nothing, and seeketh nothing: Non sumus sub
Rege, sibi quisque se vindicet:/2 'We are not under a Kings command,
every one may challenge himselfe, for let him at

----- 1 DANTE, Inferno, cant. xi. 93. 2 SEN.  Epist. xxxiii.

least know that he knoweth.' It is requisite he endevour as much to
feed himselfe with their conceits as labour to learne their prbcepts;
which, so he know how to applie, let him hardily forget, where or
whence he had them.  Truth and reason are common to all, and are no
more proper unto him that spake them heretofore, than unto him that
shall speake them hereafter. And it is no more according to Platoes
opinion than to mine, since both he and I understand and see alike.
The Bees do here and there sticke this and cull that flower, but
afterward they produce the hony, which is peculiarly their owne, then
is it no more Thyme or Majoram.  So of peeces borrowed of others, he
may lawfully alter, transforme, and confound them, to shape out of
them a perfect peece of worke, altogether his owne; alwaies provided
his judgement, his travell, studie, and institution tend to nothing,
but to frame the same perfect.  Let him hardily conceale where or
whence he hath had any helpe, and make no shew of anything, but of
that which he hath made himselfe.  Pirates, pilchers, and borrowers,
make a shew of their purchases and buildings, but not of that which
they have taken from others: you see not the secret fees or bribes
Lawyers+ take of their Clients, but you shall manifestly discover the
alliances they make, the honours they get for their children, and the
goodly houses they build.  No man makes open shew of his receits, but
every one of his gettings.  The good that comes of studie (or at least
should come) is to prove better, wiser and honester.  It is the
understanding power (said Epicharmus) that seeth and heareth, it is it
that profiteth all and disposeth all, that moveth, swayeth, and ruleth
all: all things else are but blind, senselesse, and without spirit.
And truly in barring him of libertie to doe any thing of himselfe, we
make him thereby more servile and more coward.  Who would ever enquire
of his scholler what he thinketh of Rhetorike, of Grammar of this or
of that sentence of Cicero?  Which things thoroughly fethered (as if
they were oracles) are let flie into our memorie; in which both
letters and syllables are substantiall parts of the subject.  To know
by roat is no perfect knowledge, but to keep what one hath committed
to his memories charge, is commendable: what a man directly knoweth,
that will he dispose-of, without turning still to his booke or looking
to his pattern.  A meere bookish sufficiencie is unpleasant. All I
expect of it is an imbellishing of my actions, and not a foundation of
them, according to Platoes mind, who saith, constancie, faith, and
sinceritie are true Philosophie; as for other Sciences, and tending
elsewhere, they are but garish paintings.  I would faine have Paluel
or Pompey, these two excellent dauncers of our time, with all their
nimblenesse, teach any man to doe their loftie tricks and high capers,
only with seeing them done, and without stirring out of his place, as
some Pedanticall fellowes would instruct our minds without moving or
putting it in practice.  And glad would I be to find one that would
teach us how to manage a horse, to tosse a pike, to shoot-off a peece,
to play upon the lute, or to warble with the voice, without any
exercise, as these kind of men would teach us to judge, and how to
speake well, without any exercise of speaking or judging.  In which
kind of life, or as I may terme it, Prentiship, what action or object
soever presents it-selfe into our eies, may serve us in stead of a
sufficient booke.  A prettie pranke of a boy, a knavish tricke of a
page, a foolish part of a lackey, an idle tale or any discourse else,
spoken either in jest or earnest, at the table or in companie, are
even as new subjects for us to worke upon: for furtherance whereof
commerce or common societie among men, visiting of forraine countries,
and observing of strange fashions, are verie necessary, not only to be
able (after the manner of our yong gallants of France) to report how
many the Church of Santa Rotonda is in length or breadth, or what rich
garments the curtezan Signora Livia weareth and the worth of her
hosen: or as some do, nicely to dispute how much longer or broader the
face of Nero is, which they have seene in some old ruines of Italie,
than that which is made for him in other old monuments else-where.
But they should principally observe, and he able to make certaine
relation of the humours and fashions of those countries they have
seene, that they may the better know how to correct and prepare their
wits by those of others.  I would therefore have him begin even from
his infancie to travell abroad; and first, that at one shoot he may
hit two markes, he should see neighbour-countries, namely where
languages are most different from ours; for, unlesse a mans tongue he
fashioned unto them in his youth, he shall never attaine to the true
pronunciation of them if he once grow in yeares.  Moreover, we see it
received as a common opinion of the wiser sort, that it agreeth not
with reason, that a childe he alwaies nuzzled, cockered, dandled, and
brought up in his pairents lap or sight; forsomuch as their naturall
kindnesse, or (as I may call it) tender fondnesse, causeth often, even
the wisest to prove so idle, so overnice, and so base-minded. For
parents are not capable, neither can they find in their hearts to see
them checkt, corrected, or chastised, nor indure to see them brought
up so meanly, and so far from daintinesse, and many times so
dangerously, as they must needs be.  And it would grieve them to see
their children come home from those exercises, that a Gentleman must
necessarily acquaint himselfe with, sometimes all wet and bomyred,
other times sweatie and full of dust, and to drinke being either
extreme hot or exceeding cold; and it would trouble them to see him
ride a rough, untamed horse, or with his weapon furiously incounter a
skilful Fencer, or to handle or shoot-off a musket; against which
there is no remedy, if he will make him prove a sufficient, compleat,
or honest man: he must not he spared in his youth; and it will come to
passe, that he shall many times have occasion and be forced to shocke
the rules of Physicke.

  Vitamque sub dio et trepidis aga

  In rebus./1

----- 1 HOR. 1. i.  Od. ii. 4.

  Leade he his life in open aire.

  And in affaires full of despaire.

     It is not sufficient to make his minde strong, his muskles must
     also be strengthened: the mind is overborne if it be not
     seconded: and it is too much for her alone to discharge two
     offices. I have a feeling how mine panteth, being joyned to so
     tender and sensible a bodie, and that lieth so heavie upon it.
     And in my lecture, I often perceive how my Authors in their
     writings sometimes commend examples for magnanimitie and force,
     that rather proceed from a thicke skin and hardnes of the
     bones. I have knowne men, women and children borne of so hard a
     constitution, that a blow with a cudgell would lesse hurt them,
     than a filip would doo me, and so dull and blockish, that they
     will neither stir tongue nor eyebrowes, beat them never so much.
     When wrestlers goe about to counterfeit the Philosophers
     patience, they rather shew the vigor of their sinnewes than of
     their heart. For the custome to beare travell, is to tolerate
     griefe: Labor callum obducit dolori:/1 'Labour worketh a
     hardnesse upon sorrow.' Hee must be enured to suffer the paine
     and hardnesse of exercises, that so he may be enduced to endure
     the paine of the colicke, of cauterie, of fals, of sprains, and
     other diseases incident to mans bodie: yea, if need require,
     patiently to beare imprisonment and other tortures, by which
     sufferance he shall come to be had in more esteeme and accompt:
     for according to time and place, the good as well as the bad man
     may haply fall into them; we have seen it by experience.
     Who-soever striveth against the lawes, threats good men with
     mischiefe and extortion.  Moreover, the authoritie of the Tutor
     (who should be soveraigne over him) is by the cockering and
     presence of the parents, hindred and interrupted: besides the awe
     and respect which the houshold beares him, and the knowledge of
     the meane, possibilities, and greatnesse of his house, are in my
     judgement no small lets in a young Gentleman. In this schoole of
     commerce,

----- 1 CIC.  Tusc.  Qu. 1. ii.

and societie among men, I have often noted this vice, that in lieu of
taking acquaintance of others, we only endevour to make our selves
knowne to them: and we are more ready to utter such merchandize as we
have, than to ingrosse and purchase new commodities.  Silence and
modestie+ are qualities very convenient to civil conversation.  It is
also necessary that a young man be rather taught to be
discreetly-sparing and closehanded, than prodigally-wastfull and
lavish in his expences, and moderate in husbanding his wealth when he
shall come to possesse it.  And not to take pepper in the nose for
every foolish tale that shall be spoken in his presence, because it is
an uncivil importunity to contradict whatsoever is not agreeing to our
humour: let him be pleased to correct himselfe.  And let him not seeme
to blame that in others which he refuseth to doe himselfe, nor goe
about to withstand common fashions.  Licet sapere sine pompa, sine
invidia:/1 'A man may bee wise without ostentation, without envie.'
Let him avoid those imperious images of the world, those uncivil
behaviours and childish ambition wherewith, God wot, too-too many are
possest: that is, to make a faire shew of that which is not in him:
endevouring to be reputed other than indeed he is; and as if
reprehension and new devices were hard to come by, he could by that
meane acquire into himselfe the name of some peculiar vertue.  As it
pertaineth but to great Poets to use the libertie of arts; so is it
tolerable but in noble minds and great spirits to have a preheminence
above ordinarie fashions.  Si quid Socrates et Aristippus contra morem
et consuetudinem fecerunt, idem sibi ne abitretur licere; Magis enim
illi et divinis honis hanc licentiam assequebantur:/2 'If Socrates and
Aristuppus have done ought against customs or good manner, let not a
man thinke he may doe the same: for they obtained this license by
their great and excellent good parts:' He shall be taught not to enter
rashly into discourse or contesting, but when he shall encou nter with
a Champion worthie his strength; And

----- 1 SEN.  Epist. ciii. f. 2 CIC.  Off. 1. i.

then would I not have him imploy all the tricks that may fit his
turne, but only such as may stand him in most stead. {PlainDealer+}
That he be taught to be curious in making choice of his reasons,
loving pertinency, and by consequence brevity.  That above all, he be
instructed to yeeld, yea to quit his weapons unto truth, as soone as
he shall discern the same, whether it proceed from his adversarie, or
upon better advice from himselfe; for he shall not be preferred to any
place of eminencie above others, for repeating of a prescript part;
and he is not engaged to defend any cause, further than he may
approove it; nor shall he bee of that trade where the libertie for a
man to repent and re-advise himselfe is sold for readie money.  Neque,
ut omnia, que praescripta et imperata sint, defendat, necessitate ulla
cogitur:/1 'Nor is he inforced by any necessitie to defend and make
good all that is prescribed and commanded him.' If his tutor agree
with my humour, he shall frame his affection to be most loyall and
true subject to his Prince, and a most affectionate and couragious
Gentleman in al that may concerne the honor of his Soveraigne or the
good of his countrie, {Smiley+} and endevour to suppresse in him all
maner of affection to undertake any action otherwise than for a
publike_good+ and dutie.  Besides many inconveniences, which greatly
prejudice our liberty by reason of these particular bonds, the
judgment of a man that is waged and bought, either it is less free and
honest, or else it is blemisht with oversight and ingratitude.  A
meere and precise Courtier can neither have law nor will to speake or
thinke otherwise than favourable of his Master, who among so many
thousands of his subjects hath made choice of him alone, to institute
and bring him up with his owne hand.  These favours, with the
commodities that follow minion Courtiers, corrupt (not without some
colour of reason) his libertie, and dazle his judgement.  It is
therefore commonly seene that the Courtiers-language differs from
other mens, in the same state, and to be of no great credit in such
matters.

----- 1 CIC.  Acad.  Qu. 1. iv.

Let therefore his conscience and vertue shine in his speech, and
reason be his chiefe direction.  Let him be taught to confesse such
faults as he shall discover in his owne discourses, albeit none other
perceive them but himselfe; for it is an evident shew of judgement,
and effect of sinceritie, which are the chiefest qualities he aymeth
at. {sprezzatura+} That wilfully to strive, and obstinately to contest
in words, are common qualities, most apparent in hasest mindes: That
to readvise and correct himselfe, and when one is most earnest, to
leave an ill opinion, are rare, noble, and Philosophicall conditions.
Being in companies he shall be put in minde, to cast his eyes round
about, and every where: For I note, that the chiefe places are usually
seezed upon by the most unworthie and lesse capable; and that height
of fortune is seldome ioyned with sufficiencie.  I have seene that
whilst they at the upper end of a board were busie entertaining
themselves with talking of the beautie of the hangings about a
chamber, or of the taste of some good cup of wine, many good
discourses at the lower end have utterly been lost.  He shall weigh
the carriage of every man in his calling, a Heardsman, a Mason, a
Stranger, or a Traveller; all must be imployed; every one according to
his worth; for all helps to make up a houshold; yea, the follie and
the simplicitie of others shall be as instructions to him.  By
controlling the graces and manners of others, he shall acquire unto
himselfe envie of the good and contempt of the bad.  Let him hardly be
possest with an honest curiositie to search out the nature and causes
of all things: let him survey whatsoever is rare and singular about
him; a building, a fountaine, a man, a place where any battell hath
been fought, or the passages of Caesar or Charlemaine.

  Quae tellus sit lenta gelu, quae putris ab aestu

  Ventus in Italiam quis bene vela ferat./1


  What land is parcht with heat, what clog'd with frost

  What wind drives kindly to th' Italian coast.

He shall endevour to be familiarly acquainted with

----- 1 PROP. 1. iv.  El. iii. 39.

the customes, with the meanes, with the state, with the dependances
and alliances of all Princes; they are things soone and pleasant to be
learned, and most profliable to be knowne.  In this acquaintance of
men, my intending is, that hee chiefely comprehend them, that live but
by the memorie of bookes.  He shall, by the help of Histories, informe
himselfe of the worthiest minds that were in the best ages.  It is a
frivolous studie, if a man list, but of unvaluable worth to such as
can make use of it, and as Plato saith, the only studie the
Lacedemonians reserved for themselves. What profit shall he not reap,
touching this point, reading the lives of our Plutark+?  Alwayes
conditioned, the master bethinke himselfe whereto his charge tendeth,
and that he imprint not so much in his schollers mind the date of the
ruine of Carthage, as the manners of Hanniball and Scipio, nor so much
where Marcellus died, as because he was unworthy of his devoire+ he
died there: that he teach him not somuch to know Histories as to judge
of them.  It is amongst things that best agree with my humour, the
subject to which our spirits doe most diversly applie themselves.  I
have read in Titus Livius a number of things, which peradventure
others never read, in whom Plutarke haply read a hundred more than
ever I could read, which perhaps the author himselfe did never intend
to set downe.  To some kind of men it is a meere gramaticall studie
but to others a perfect anatomie of Philosophy; by means whereof the
secretest part of our nature is searched into.  There are in Plutarke
many ample discourses most worthy to be knowne: for in my judgement,
he is the chiefe worke-master of such works, whereof there are a
thousand, whereat he hath but slightly glanced; for with his finger he
doth but point us out a way to walke in, if we list; and is sometimes
pleased to give but a touch at the quickest and maine point of a
discourse, from whence they are by diligent studie to be drawne, and
so brought into open market.  As that saying of his, That the
inhabitants of Asia served but one alone, because they could not
pronounce one onely syllable, which is Non, gave perhaps both subject
and occasion to my friend Boetie to compose his booke of
voluntarie_servitude+.  If it were no more but to see Plutarke wrest a
slight action to mans life, or a word that seemeth to beare no such
sence, it will serve for a whole discourse.  It is pittie men of
understanding should so much love brevitie; without doubt their
reputation is thereby better, but we the worse.  Plutarke had rather
we should commend him for his judgement than for his knowledge, he
loveth better to leave a kind of longing-desire in us of him, than a
satietie.  He knew verie well that even in good things too much may be
said: and that Alexandridas did justly reprove him who spake verie
good sentences to the Ephores, but they were over tedious.  Oh
stranger, quoth he, thou speakest what thou oughtest, otherwise then
thou shouldest.  Those that have leane and thin bodies stuffe them up
with bumbasting.  And such as have but poore matter, will puff it up
with loftie words.  There is a marvelous cleerenesse, or as I may
terme it an enlightning of mans judgement drawne from the commerce of
men, and by frequenting abroad in the world; we are all so contrived
and compast in our selves, that our sight is made shorter by the
length of our nose. When Socrates was demaunded whence he was, he
answered, not of Athens, but of the world; for he, who had his
imagination more full and farther stretching, embraced all the world
for his native Citie, and extended his acquaintance, his societie, and
affections to all man-kind: and not as we do, that looke no further
than our feet.  If the frost chance to nip the vines about my village,
my Priest doth presently argue that the wrath of God hangs over our
head, and threatneth all mankind: and judgeth that the Pippe is
alreadie falne upon the Canibals.  In viewing these intestine and
civill broiles of ours, who doth not exclaime, that this worlds vast
frame is neere unto a dissolution, and that the day of judgement is
readie to fall on us? never remembering that many worse revolutions
have been seene, and that whilest we are plunged in griefe, and
overwhelmed in sorrow, a thousand other parts of the world besides are
blessed with happinesse, and wallow in pleasures, and never thinke on
us? whereas, when I behold our lives, our license, and impunitie, I
wonder to see them so milde and easie.  He on whose head it haileth,
thinks all the Hemispheare besides to be in a storme and tempest.  And
as that dull-pated Savoyard said, that if the seelie King of France
could cunningly have managed his fortune, he might verie well have
made himselfe chiefe Steward of his Lords household, whose imagination
conceived no other greatnesse than his Masters; we are all insensible
of this kind of errour: an errour of great consequence and prejudice.
But whosoever shall present into his inward eyes, as it were in a
Table, the Idea of the great image of our universall mother Nature,
attired in her richest robes, sitting in the throne of her Majestie,
and in her visage shall read so generall and so constant a varietie;
he that therein shall view himselfe, not himselfe alone, but a whole
Kingdome, to be in respect of a great circle but the smallest point
that can be imagined, he onely can value things according to their
essentiall greatnesse and proportion.  This great universe (which some
multiplie as Species under one Genus) is the true looking-glasse
wherein we must looke, if we will know whether we be of a good stamp
or in the right byase.  To conclude, I would have this worlds-frame to
be my Schollers choise-booke: So many strange humours, sundrie sects,
varying judgements, diverse opinions, different lawes, and
fantasticall customes teaches us to judge rightly of ours, and
instruct our judgement to acknowledge his imperfections and naturall
weaknesse, which is no easie an apprentiship: So many innovations of
estates, so many fals of Princes, and changes of publike fortune, may
and ought to teach us, not to make so great accompt of ours: So many
names , so many victories, and so many conquests buried in darke
oblivion, makes the hope to perpetuate our names but ridiculous, by
the surprising of ten Argo-lettiers, or of a small cottage, which is
knowne but by his fall. The pride and fiercenesse of so many strange
and gorgeous shewes: the pride- puft majestie of so many courts, and
of their greatnesse, ought to confirme and assure our sight,
undauntedly to beare the affronts and thunder-claps of ours, without
feeling our eyes: So many thousande of men, low-laide in their graves
afore us, may encourage us not to feare, or be dismaied to go meet so
good companie in the other world; and so of all things
else.{Prospero_dream+ Our life (said Pithagoras) drawes neare unto the
great and populous assemblies of the Olympike games wherein some, to
get the glorie and to win the goale of the games, exercise their
bodies with all industrie; others, for greedinesse of gaine, bring
thither marchandise to sell: others there are (and those be not the
worst) that seek after no other good, but to marke how wherefore, and
to what end, all things are done: and to be spectators or observers of
other mens lives and actions, that so they may the better judge and
direct their owne.  Unto examples+ may all the most profitable
Discourses of Philosophie be sorted, which ought to be the touch-stone
of human actions, and a rule to square them by, to whom may be said,

           ----- quid fas optare, aspe

  Vtile nummus habet, patriae charisque propinqui

  Quantum elargiri deceat, quem te Deus ess

  Iussist, et humana qua parte locatus es in re

  Quid sumus, aut quidnam victuri gignimur./2


  What thou maiest wish, what profit may come cleare

  From new-stampt coyne, to friends and countrie dear

  What thou ought'st give: whom God would have thee bee

  And in what part mongst men he placed thee

  What we are, and wherefore

  To live heer we were bore.

What it is to know, and not to know (which ought to be the scope of
studie), what valour, what temperance, and what justice is: what
difference there is betweene

----- 1 PERS.  Sat. iii. 69. 2 Ib. 67.

ambition and avance, bondage and freedome, subjection and libertie, by
which markes a man may distinguish true and perfect contentment, and
how far-forth one ought to feare or apprehend death, griefe, or
shame.{gent+}

  Et quo quemque modo fugiatque fertaque laborem./1


  Now ev'ry labour he may plie.

  And beare, or ev'ry labour flie.

What wards or springs move us, and the causes of so many motions in
us: For me seemeth, that the first discourses wherewith his conceit
should be sprinkled, ought to be those that rule his manners and
direct his sense; which will both teach him to know himselfe, and how
to live and how todie_well+.  Among the liberall_Sciences+, let us
begin with that which makes us free; Indeed, they may all, in some
sort stead us, as an instruction to our life, and use of it, as all
other things else serve the same to some purpose or other.  But let us
make especiall choice of that which may directly and pertinently serve
the same.  If we could restraine and adapt the appurtenances of our
life to their right byase, and naturall limits, we should find the
best part of the Sciences that now are in use, cleane out of fashion
with us: yea, and in those that are most in use, there are certaine
by-wayes and deep-flows most profitable, which we should do well to
leave, and to the institution of Socrates, limit the course of our
studies in those where profit is wanting. {Prospero+}

         ----- sapere aud

  Incipe: vivendi qui recte prorogat hora

  Rusticus expectat dum defluayt amnis at ill

  Labitur, et labetur in omne volubis aevum


  Be bold to be wise: to begin, be stron

  He that to live well doth the time prolong

  Clowne-like expects, till downe the streame be run

  That runs, and will run, till the world be done./2

It is mere simplicitie to teach our children,

  Quid moveant Pisces, animosaque siqna Leonis

  Lotus et Hesperia quid Capricornus aqua./3


----- 1 VIRG.  AEn. 1. iii. 853. 2 HOR. 1.i.  Epist. ii. 40. 3
PROP. 1. iv. El. i. 85.

  What Pisces move, or hot breath'd Leos beames.

Or Capricornus bath'd in western streames, the knowledge of the
starres, and the motion of the eighth spheare, before their owne;

  T,'fi-yeiise@@s 4,uo /l


  What longs it to the seaven stars, and me.

  Or those about Bootes be.

Anaximenes writing to Pythagoras, saith, 'With what sense can I amuse
my selfe in the secrets of the Starres, having continually death or
bondage before mine eyes!' {Prospero+} For at that time the Kings of
Persia were making preparations to war against his Countrie.  All men
ought to say so: Being beaten with ambition, with avarice, with
rashnesse, and with superstition, and having, such other enemies unto
life within him.  Wherefore shall I study and take care about the
mobility and variation of the world?  When hee is once taught what is
fit to make him better and wiser, he shall be entertained with
Logicke, naturall Philosophy.  Geometry, and Rhetoricke, then having
setled his judgement, looke what science he doth most addict him selfe
unto, he shall in short time attaine to the perfection of it. His
lecture shall be somtimes by way of talke and somtimes by booke: his
tutor may now and then supply him with the same Author, as an end and
motive of his institution: sometimes giving him the pith and substance
of it ready chewed.  And if of himselfe he be not so throughly
acquainted with bookes, that hee may readily find so many notable
discourses as are in them to effect his purpose, it shall not be
amisse that some learned man bee appointed to keepe him company, who
at any time of need may furnish him with such munition as hee shall
stand in need of; that hee may afterward distribute and dispense them
to his best use.  And that this kind of lesson be more easie and
naturall than that of Gaza, who will make question?  Those are but
harsh, thornie, and unpleasant precepts; vaine, idle and immaterial

----- 1 ANACR.  Od. xvii. 10,11.

words, on which small hold may be taken; wherein is nothing to quicken
the minde.  In this the spirit findeth substance to hide and feed
upon. A fruit without all comparison much better, and that will soone
be ripe. It is a thing worthy consideration, to see what state things
are brought unto in this our age; and how Philosophie, {Prospero+}
even to the wisest, and men of best understanding, is but an idle,
vaine and fantasticall name, of small use and lesse worth, both in
opinion and effect.  I thinke these Sophistries are the cause of it,
which have forestalled the wayes to come unto it: They doe very ill
that goe about to make it seeme as it were inaccessible for children
to come unto, setting it foorth with a wrimpled, gastlie, and frowning
visage; who hath masked her with so counterfet, pale, and hideous a
countenance?  There is nothing more beauteous, nothing more
delightfal, nothing more gainesome; and as I may say, nothing more
fondly wanton: for she presenteth nothing to our eyes, and preacheth
nothing to our eares. but sport and pastime.  A sad and lowring-looke
plainly declareth that that is not her haunt.  Demetrius the
Gramarian, finding a companie of Philosophers sitting close together
in the Temple of Delphos, said unto them, 'Either I am deceived, or by
your plausible and pleasant lookes, you are not in any serious and
earnest discourse amongst your selves;' to whom one of them, named
Heracleon the Megarian, answered, 'That belongeth to them, who busie
themselves in seeking whether the future tense of the verbe SdkAw hath
a double k, or that labour to find the derivation of the comparatives,
xe4poy, OcArio;, and of the superlatives Xeiplo.Top',BC'.kTITTOV, it
is that they must chafe in intertaining themselves with their science:
as for discourses of Philosophie they are wont to glad, rejoyce, and
not to vex and molest those that use them.

  Deprendas animi tormenta latentis in agr

  Corpore, deprendas et gaudia; sumit virumque utrumque lnde habitum
  facies./1


----- 1 JUVEN.  Sat. ix. 18.

  You may perceive the torments of the mind.

  Bid in sicke bodie, you the joyes may find;

  The face such habit takes in either kind.

     That mind which harboureth Philosophie, ought by reason of her
sound health, make that bodie also sound and healthie: it ought to
make her contentment to through-shine in all exteriour parts: it ought
to shapen and modell all outward demeanours to the modell of it: and
by consequence arme him that doth possesse it, with a gracious
stoutnesse and lively audacite, with an acuve and pleasing gesture,
and with a setled and cheereful countenance.  The most evident token
and apparant signe of true wisdome is a constant and unconstrained
rejoycing, whose estate is like unto all things above the Moone, that
is ever cleare, alwaies bright. It is Baroco and Baralipton, that
makes their followers prove so base and idle, and not Philosophie;
they know her not but by heare-say; what?  Is it not shee that
cleereth all stormes of the mind?  And teacheth miserie famine and
sicknesse to laugh?  Not by reason of some imaginarie Epicicles, but
by naturall and palpable reasons.  Shee aymeth at nothing but vertue;
it is vertue shee seekes after; which as the schoole saith, is not
pitcht on the top of an high, steepie, or inaccessible; hill; for they
that have come unto her, affirme that cleane-contrarie shee keeps her
stand, and holds her mansion in a faire, flourishing, and pleasant
plaine, whence as from an high watch tower, she survaieth all things,
to be subject unto her, to whom any man may with great facilitie come,
if he but know the way or entrance to her palace: for, the pathes that
lead unto her are certaine fresh and shadie greene allies, sweet and
flowrie waies, whose ascent is even, easie, and nothing wearisome,
like unto that of heavens vaults.  Forsomuch as they have not
frequented this vertue, who gloriously, as in a throne of Majestie,
sits soveraigne, goodly, triumphant, lovely, equally delicious, and
couragious, protesting her selfe to be a professed and irreconcileable
enemie to all sharpnesse, austerite, feare, and compulsion; having
nature for her guide, fortune and voluptuousness for her companions;
they according to their weaknesse have imaginarily fained her, to have
a foolish, sad, grim, quarelous, spitefull, threatning, and
disdainfull visage, with an horride and unpleasant looke; and have
placed her upon a craggie, sharpe, and unfrequented rocke, amidst
desert climes and uncouth crags, as a scar-crow, or bug-beare, to
affright the common people with. Now the tutour, which ought to know
that he should rather seek to fill the mind and store the will of his
disciple, as much, or rather more, with love and affection, than with
awe, and reverence unto vertue, may shew and tell him, that Poets
follow common humours, making him plainly to perceive and as it were
palpably to feele, that the Gods have rather placed labour and sweat
at the entrances which lead to Venus chambers, than at the doores that
direct to Pallas cabinets.  And when he shall perceive his scholler to
have a sensible feeling of himselfe presenting Bradamant or Angelica
before him, as a Mistresse to enjoy, embelished with a naturall,
active, generous, and unspotted beautie not uglie or Giant-like, but
blithe, livelie, in respect of a wanton, soft, affected, and
artificiall- flaring beautie; the one attired like unto a young man,
coyfed with a bright-shining helmet, the other disguised and drest
about the head like unto an impudent harlot, with embroyderies,
frizelings, and carcanets of pearles: he will ho doubt deeme his owne
love to be a man and no woman, if in his choice he differ from that
effeminate+ shepheard of Phrygia.  In this new kind of lesson be shall
declare unto him, that the prize, the glorie, and height of true
vertue, consisted in the facilitie, profit, and pleasure of his
exercises: so far from difficultie and incumbrances, that children as
well as men, the simple as soone as the wise, may come unto her
Discretion and temperance, not force or waywardnesse are the
instruments to bring him unto her.  Socrates (vertues chiefe favorite)
that he might the better walke in the pleasant, naturall, and open
path of her progresses, doth voluntarily and in good earnest, quit all
compulsion.  Shee is the nurse and foster-mother of all humane
pleasures, who in making them just and upright, she also makes them
sure and sincere.  By moderating them, she keepeth them in ure and
breath.  In limiting and cutting them off, whom she refuseth; she
whets us on toward those she leaveth unto us; and plenteously leaves
us them, which Nature pleaseth, and like a kind mother giveth us over
unto satietie, if not unto wearisomnesse, unlesse we will peradventure
say that the rule and bridle, which stayeth the drunkard before
drunkennesse, the glutton before surfetting, and the letcher before
the losing of his haire, be the enemies of our pleasures.  If common
fortune faile her, it cleerely scaped her; or she cares not for her,
or she frames another unto herselfe, altogether her owne, not so
fleeting nor so rowling.  She knoweth the way how to be rich, mightie
and wise, and how to lie in sweet-perfumed beds.  She loveth life; she
delights in beautie, in glorie, and in health.  But her proper and
particular office is, first to know how to use such goods temperately,
and how to lose them constantly.  An office much more noble than
severe, without which all course of life is unnaturall, turbulent, and
deformed, to which one may lawfully joyne those rocks, those
incumbrances, and those hideous monsters.  If so it happen, that his
Disciple prove of so different a condition, that he rather love to
give eare to an idle fable than to the report of some noble voiage, or
other notable and wise discourse, when he shall heare it; that at the
sound of a Drum or clang of a Trumpet, which are wont to rowse and
arme the youthly heat of his companions, turneth to another that
calleth him to see a play, tumbling, jugling tricks, or other idle
lose-time sports; and who for pleasures sake doth not deeme it more
delightsome to returne all sweatie and wearie from a victorious
combat, from wrestling, or riding of a horse, than from a tennis-court
or dancing schoole, with the prize or honour of such exercises; The
best remedy I know for such a one is, to put him prentice to some base
occupation, in some good towne or other, yea, were he the sonne of a
Duke; according to Platoes rule, who saith 'That ohildren must be
placed, not according to their fathers conditions, but the faculties
of their mind.' Since it is Philosophie that teacheth us to live, and
that infancie as well as other ages, may plainly read her lessons in
the same, why should it not be imparted unto young Schollers?

  Vdum et molle lutum est, nunc nunc propetandus, et acri

  Fingendus sine fine rota./1


  He's moist and soft mould, and must by and by

  Be cast, made up, while wheele whirls readily.

We are taught to live when our life is well-nigh spent.  Many
schollers have been infected with that loathsome and marrow-wasting
disease before ever they came to read Aristotles+ treatise of
Temperance.  Cicero was wont to say, 'That could he out-live the lives
of two men, he should never find leasure to study the 'Lyrike Poets.'
And I find these Sophisters both worse and more unprofitable.  Our
childe is engaged in greater matters; And but the first fifteene or
sixteene yeares of his life are due unto Pedantisme, the rest unto
action: {Prospero+} let us therefore imploy so short time as we have
to live in more necessarie instructions.  It is an abuse; remove these
thornie quiddities of Logike, whereby our life can no whit be amended,
and betake our selves to the simple discourses of Philosophy; know how
to chuse and fitly to make use of them: they are much more easie to be
conceived than one of Bocace his tales.  A childe comming from nurse
is more capable of them, than he is to learne to read or write.
Philosophy hath discourses, whereof infancie as well as decaying
old-age may make good use.  I am of Plutarkes mind, which is, that
Aristotle did not so much ammuse his great Disciple about the arts how
to frame Syllogismes, or the principles of Geometric, as he endevoured
to instruct him with

----- 1 PERS.  Sat. iii. 23.

good precepts concerning valour, prowesse, magnanimitie, and
temperance+, and an undanted assurance not to feare any thing; and
with such munition he sent him, being yet verie young, to subdue the
Empire of the world, only with 30000 footmen, 4000 horsemen, and 42000
Crownes in mome.  As for other arts amd sciences; he saith Alexander+
honoured them, and commended their excellencie and comlinesse; but for
any pleasure he tooke in them, his affection could not easily be
drawne to exercise them.

         ----- petite hinc juvenesque senesqu

  Finem animo certum, miserisque viatica canis./1


  Young men and old, draw hence (in your affaires

  Your minds set marke, provision for gray haires.

     It is that which Epicurus said in the beginning of his letter to
     Memiceus: 'Neither let the youngest shun nor the oldest wearie
     himselfe in philosophying for who doth otherwise seemeth to say,
     that either season to live happily is not yet come, or is already
     past.' Yet would I not have this young gentleman pent-up, nor
     carelesly cast-off to the heedlesse choler or melancholy humour
     of the hasty Schoole-master. I would not have his budding spirit
     corrupted with keeping him fast-tied, and as it were labounng
     fourteene or fifteene houres a day poaring on his booke, as some
     doe, as if he were a day-labouring man; neither doe I thinke it
     fit, if at any time, by reason of some solitairie or melancholy
     complexion, he should be seene with an over-indiscreet
     application given to his booke, it should be cherished in him;
     for, that doth often make him both unapt for civill conversation
     and distracts him from better imployments: How many have I seene
     in my daies, by an over-greedy desire of knowledge, become as as
     it were foolish?  Carneades was so deeply plunged, and as I may
     say besotted in it, that he could never have leasure to cut his
     haire, or pare his nailes: nor would I have his noble manners
     obscured by the incivilitie and barbarisms of others.

----- 1 PERS.  Sat. v. 64.

The French wisdome hath long since proverbially been spoken of as
verie apt to conceive study in her youth, but most unapt to keepe it
long.  In good truth, we see at this day that there is nothing
lovelier to behold than the young children of France; but for the most
part, they deceive the hope which was fore-apprehended of them: for
when they once become men, there is no excellencie at all in them.  I
have heard men of understanding hold this opinion, that the Colleges
to which they are sent (of which there are store) doe thus besot them:
whereas to our schollers a cabinet, a gardin, the table, the bed, a
solitarinesse, a companie, morning and evening, and all houres shall
be alike unto him, all places shall be a study for him: for Philosophy
(as a former of judgemente, and modeler of customes) shall be his
principall lesson, having the privilege to entermeddle her selfe with
all things, and in all places.  Isocrates the Orator, being once
requested in a great banket to speake of his art, when all thought he
had reason to answer, said, 'It is not now time to doe what I can, and
what should now be done, I cannot doe it; For, to present orations, or
to enter into disputation of Rhetorike, before a companie assembled
together to be merrie, and make good cheere, would be but a medley of
harsh and jarring musicke.'/1 The like may be said of all others
Sciences.  But touching Philosophy, namely, in that point where it
treateth of man, and of his duties and offices, it hath been the
common judgement of the wisest, that in regard of the pleasantnesse of
her conversations, she ought not to be rejected, neither at banquets
nor at sports.  And Plato having invited her to his solemne feast, we
see how kindly she entertaineth the companie with a milde behaviour,
fitly stuting her selfe to time and place, notwithstanding it be one
of his learned'st and profitable discourses.{wit+}

  Aeque pauperibus prodest, locupletibus aeque

  Et neglecta aeque pueris senibusque nocebit./1

----- 1 HOR.  I. i.  Epist. 125.

Poore men alike, alike rich men it easeth.  Alike it, scorned, old and
young displeaseth.  So doubtlesse he shall lesse be idle than others;
for even as the paces we bestow walking in a gallerie, althouch they
be twice as many more, wearie us not so much as those we spend in
going a set journey: So our lesson being past over, as it were, by
chance, or way of encounter, without strict observance of time or
place, being applied to all our actions, shall be digested, and never
felt.  All sports and exercises shall be a part of his study; running,
wrestling, musicke, dancing, hunting, and managing of armes and
horses.  I would have the exterior demeanor or decencie, and the
disposition of his person to be fashioned together with his mind: for,
it is not a mind, it is not a body that we erect, but it is a man, and
we must not make two parts of him.  And as Plato saith, They must not
be erected one without another, but equally be directed, no otherwise
than a couple of horses matched to draw in one selfe-same teeme.  And
to heare him, doth he not seeme to imploy more time and care in the
exercises of his bodie: and to thinke that the minde is together with
the same exercised, and not the contrarie?  As for other matters, this
institution ought to be directed by a sweet-severe mildnesse; Not as
some do, who in liew of gently-bidding children to the banquet of
letters, present them with nothing but horror and crueltie.  Let me
have this violence and compulsion removed, there is nothing that in my
seeming, doth more bastardise and dizzie a wel-borne and gentle
nature: If you would have him stand in awe of shame and punishment,
doe not so much enure him to it: accustome him patiently to endure
sweat and cold, the sharpnesse of the wind, the heat of the sunne, and
how to despise all hazards.  Remove from him all nicenesse and
quaintnesse in clothing,{fop+} in lying, in eating, and in drinking:
fashion him to all things, that he prove not a faire and wanton-puling
boy, but a lustie and vigorous boy: When I was a child, being a man,
and now am old, I have ever judged and believed the same.  But amongst
other things, I could never away with this kind of discipline used in
most of our Colleges.  It had peradventure been lesse hurtfull, if
they had somewhat inclined to mildnesse, or gentle entreane.  It is a
verie prison of captivated youth, and proves dissolute in punishing it
before it be so.  Come upon them when they are going to their lesson,
and you heare nothing but whipping and brawling, both of children
tormented, and masters besotted with anger and chafing.  How wide are
they, which go about to allure a child's mind to go to its booke,
being yet but tender and fearefull, with a stearne-frowning
countenance, and with hands full of rods?  Oh wicked and pernicious
manner of teaching! which Quintillian hath very wel noted, that this
imperious kind of authoritie, namely, this way of punishing of
children, drawes many dangerous in-conveniences within. How much more
decent were it to see their school-houses and formes strewed with
green boughs and flowers, than with bloudy burchentwigs?  If it lay in
me, I would doe as the Philosopher Speusippus did, who caused the
pictures of Gladness and Joy, of Flora and of the Graces, to be set up
roundabout his school-house.  Where their profit lieth, there should
also be their recreation.  Those meats ought to be sugred over, that
are healthful for childrens stomakes, and those made bitter that are
hurtfull for them.  It is strange to see how carefull Plato sheweth
him selfe in framing of his lawes about the recreation and pastime of
the youth of his Citie, and how far he extends him selfe about their
exercises, sports, songs, leaping, and dancing, whereof he saith, that
severe antiquitie gave the conduct and patronage unto the Gods
themselves, namely, to Apollo, to the Muses, and to Minerva.  Marke
but how far-forth he endevoreth to give a thousand precepts to be kept
in his places of exercises both of bodie and mind. As for learned
Sciences, he stands not much upon them, and seemeth in particular to
commend Poesie, but for Musickes sake.  All strangenesse and selfe-
particularitie in our manners and conditions, is to be shunned, as an
enemie to societie and civill conversation.  Who would not be
astonished at Demophons complexion, chiefe steward of Alexanders
household, who was wont to sweat in the shadow, and quiver for cold in
the sunne?  I have seene some to startle at the smell of an apple more
than at the shot of a peece; some to be frighted with a mouse, some
readie to cast their gorge at the sight of a messe of creame, and
others to be scared with seeing a fether bed shaken: as Germanicus,
who could abide to see a cock, or heare his crowing.  There may haply
be some hidden propertie of nature, which in my judgement might
easilie be removed, if it were taken in time.  Institution hath gotten
this upon me (I must confesse with much adoe) for, except heere, all
things else that are mans food agree indifferently with my taste.  The
bodie being yet souple, ought to be accommodated to all fashions and
customes; and (alwaies provided, his appetites and desires be kept
under) let a yong man boldly be made fit for al Nations and companies;
yea, if need be, for al disorders and surfetings; let him acquaint him
selfe with al fashions; That he may be able to do al things, and love
to do none but those that are commendable.  Some strict Philosophers
commend not, but rather blame Calisthenes, for losing the good favour
of his Master Alexander, only because he would not pledge him as much
as he had drunke to him.  He shall laugh, jest, dally, and debauch
himselfe with his Prince.  And in his debauching, I would have him
out-go al his fellowes in vigor or and constancie, and that he omit
not to doe evil neither for want of strength or knowledge, but for
lacke of will.  Multum interest utrum peccare quis nolit, aut
nesciat./1 'There is a great difference, whether one have no will, or
no wit to goe amisse.' I thought to have honoured a gentleman (as
great a stranger, and as far from such riotous disorders as any is in
France) by enquiring of him in verie good companie, how many times in
all his life he had bin drunke in Germanie during the time of his
abode there, about the necessarie

----- 1 HOR.  Epist. xvii. 23.

affaires of our King; who tooke it even as I meant it, and answered
three times, telling the time and manner how.  I know some, who for
want of that qualitie, have been much perplexed when they have had
occasion to converse with that nation.  I have often noted with great
admiration, that wonderfull nature of Alcibiades, to see how easilie
he could sute himselfe to so divers fashions and different humors,
without prejudice unto his health; sometimes exceeding the
sumptuousnesse and pompe of the Persians, and now and then surpassing
the austeritie and frugalitie of the Lacedemonians; as reformed in
Sparta, as voluptuous in Ionia.

  Omnis Aristippum decuit color, et status, et res./1


  All colours, states, and things are fit

  For courtly Aristippus wit.

Such a one would I frame my Disciple,

----- quem duplici panno patientia velat,

Mirabor, vitae via si conversa decebit.

  Whom patience clothes with sutes of double kind

  I muse, if he another way will find.


  Personamque feret non inconcinnus uttamque./2

  He not unfitly ma

  Both parts and persons play.

Loe here my lessons, wherein he that acteth them, profiteth more than
he that but knoweth them, whom if you see, you heare, and if you heare
him, you see him.  God forbid, saith some bodie in Plato, that to
Philosophize, be to learne many things, and to exercise the acts.
Hanc amplissimam omnium artium bene vivendi disciplinam, vita magis
quam litteris persequenti sunt./3 'This discipline of living well,
which is the amplest of all other arts, they followed rather in their
lives than in their learning or writing.' Leo Prince of the
Phliasians, enquiring of Heraclides Ponticus what art he professed, he
answered, 'Sir, I professe neither art nor

----- 1 HOR.  Epist. xvii. 25. 2 Ib. 29. 3 CIC.  Tusc.  Qu. 1. iv._

fcience; but I am a Philosopher.' {Prospero+} Some reproved Diogenes,
     that being an ignorant man, he did nevertheless-enmeddle with
     Philosophie, to whom he replied, 'So much the more reason have I
     and to greater purpose doe I meddle with it.' Hegesias praid him
     upon a time to reade some booke unto him: 'You are a merry man,'
     said he; 'As you chuse naturall and not painted right and not
     counterfeit figges to eat, why doe you not likewise chuse, not
     the painted and written, but the true and naturall exercises?' He
     shall not so much repeat, as act his lesson.  In his actions
     shall he make repetition of the same.  We must observe, whether
     there bee wisdome in his enterprises, integritie in his demeanor,
     modestie in his jestures, justice in his actions, judgement and
     grace in his speech, courage in his sicknesse, moderation in his
     sports, temperance in his pleasures, order in the government of
     his house, and indifference in his taste, whether it be flesh,
     fish, wine, or water, or whatsoever he feedeth upon.  Qui
     disciplinam suam non ostentationem scientiae sed legem vitae
     putet: quique obtemperet ipse sibi et decretis pareat./1 'Who
     thinks his learning not an ostentation of knowledge, but a law of
     life, and himselfe obayes himselfe and doth what is decreed.'
     The true mirror of our discourses is the course of our lives.
     Zeuxidamus answered one that demanded of him, why the
     Lacedemonians did not draw into a booke, the ordinances of
     prowesse, that so their yong men might read them; 'it is,' saith
     he, 'because they would rather accustome them to deeds and
     actions than to bookes and writings.' Compare at the end of
     fifteene or sixteens yeares one of those collegiall Latinizers,
     who hath imployed all that while onely in learning how to speake,
     to such a one as I meane.  The world is nothing but babling and
     words, and I never saw man that doth not rather speake more than
     he ought, than lesse.  Notwithstanding halfe our age is consumed
     that way.  We are kept foure or five yeares learning to
     understand bare words, and to joine

----- 1 CIC.  Tusc.  Qu. 1. ii.

them into clauses, then as long in proportioning a great bodie
extended into foure or five parts; and five more at least ere we can
succinctly know how to mingle, joine, and interlace them handsomly
into a subtil fashion, and into one coherent orbe.  Let us leave it to
those whose profession is to doe nothing else.  Being once on my
journey to Orleans, it was my chance to meet upon that plaine that
lieth on this side Clery, with two Masters of Arts, traveling toward
Bordeaux, about fiftie paces one from another; far off behind them, I
descride a troupe of horsemen, their Master riding formost, who was
the Earle of Rochefocault; one of my servants enquiring of the first
of those Masters of Arts, what Gentleman he was that followed him;
suposing my servant had meant his fellow-scholler, for he had not yet
seen the Earles traine, answered pleasantly, 'He is no gentleman.
Sir, but a Gramarian, and I am a Logitian.' Now, we that contrariwise
seek not to frame a Gramiarian, nor a Logitian, but a compleat
gentleman, let us give them leave to mispend their time; we have
else-where, and somewhat else of more import to doe.  So that our
Disciple be well and sufficiently stored with matter; words will
follow and if they will not follow gently, he shall hale on perforce.
I heare some excuse themselves, that they cannot expresse their
meaning, and make a semblance that their heads are so full stuft with
many goodly things, but for want of eloquence they can neither utter
nor make show of them.  It is a meere fopperie.  And will you know
what, in my seeming, the cause is?  They are shadows and Chimeraes,
proceeding of some formelesse conceptions, which they cannot
distinguish or resolve within, and by conseguence are not able to
produce them inasmuch as they understand not themselves: And if you
but marke their earnestnesse, and how they stammer and labour at the
point of their deliverie, you would deeme that what they go withall,
is but a conceiving, and therefore nothing neere downe-lying; and that
they doe but licke that imperfect and shapelesse lump of matter, As
for me, I am of opinion, and Socrates would have it so, that he who
had a cleare and lively imagination in his mind, may easilie produce
and utter the same, although it be in Bergamask or Welsh, and if he be
dumbe, by signes and tokens.

  Verbaque praevisam rem non invita sequentur./1


  When matter we fore-know

  Words voluntarie flow.

As one said, as poetically in his prose, Cum res animum occupavere,
verba ambiunt;/2 'When matter hath possest their minds, they hunt
after words:' and another: Ipsee res verba rapiunt:/3 'Things
themselves will catch and carry words:' He knowes neither Ablative,
Conjunctive, Substantive, nor Gramar, no more doth his Lackeye nor any
Oyster-wife about the streets, and yet if you have a mind to it he
will intertaine you, your fill, and peradventure stumble as little and
as seldome against the rules of his tongue, as the best Master of arts
in France. {PlainDealer+} He hath no skill in Rhetoricke, nor can he
with a preface fore-stall and captivate the Gentle Readers good will:
nor careth he greatly to know it.  In good sooth, all this garish
painting is easilie defaced, by the lustre of an in-bred and simple
truth; for these dainties and quaint devices serve but to ammuse the
vulgar sort; unapt and incapable to taste the most solid and firme
meat: as Afer verie plainly declareth in Cornelius Tacitus.  The
Ambassadours of Samos being come to Cleomenes King of Sparta, prepared
with a long prolix Oration, to stir him up to war against the tyrant
Policrates, after he had listned a good while unto them, his answer
was: 'Touching your Exordium or beginning I have forgotten it; the
middle I remember not; and for your conclusion I will do nothing in
it.' A fit, and (to my thinking) a verie good answer; and the Orators
were put to such a shift, as they knew not what to replie.  And what
said another? the Athenians from

----- 1 HOR.  Ars.  Poet. 311. 2 SEN.  Controv. 1. vii. preae. 3
CIC. de.  Fin. 1. iii. c. 5.

out two of their cunning Architects, were to chuse one to erect a
notable great frame; the one of them more affected and selfe
presuming, presented himselfe before them with a smooth
fore-premeditated discourse, about the subject of that piece of worke,
and thereby drew the judgements of the common people unto his liking;
but the other in few words spake thus: 'Lords of Athens, what this man
hath said I will performe.' In the greatest earnestnesse of Ciceroes
eloquence many were drawn into a kind of admiration; But Cato jesting
at it, said, 'Have we not a pleasant Consull?' A quicke cunning
Argument, and a wittie saying, whether it go before or come after, it
is never out of season.  If it have no coherence with that which gooth
before, nor with what commeth after; it is good and commendable in it
selfe.  I am none of those that think a good Ryme, to make a good
Poeme; let him hardly (if so he please) make a short syllable long, it
is no great matter: if the invetition be rare and good, and his
wit_and_judgement+ have cunningly played their part.  I will say to
such a one; he is a good Poet, but an ill Versifier.

  Emunctae naris durus componere versus./1


  A man whose sense could finely pierce.

  But harsh and hard to make a verse.


Let a man (saith Horace) make his worke loose all seames, measures,
and joynts.

  Tempora certa modosque et quod prius ordine verbum est,/2


  Posterius facias, praeponens ultima primis

  Invenias etiam disjecti membra Poetae./3


  Set times and moods, make you the first word las

  The last word first, as if they were new cast

  Yet find th' unjoynted Poets joints stand fast.

He shall for all that, nothing. gain-say himselfe, every piece will
make a good shew.  To this purpose answered Menander those that chid
him, the day

----- 1 HOR. 1. i.  Sat. iv. 8.  Ib. 58. 3 Ib. 62.

being at hand, in which he had promised a Comedy, and had not begun
the same, 'Tut-tut,' said he, I it is alreadie finished, there wanteth
nothing but to adde the verse unto it;' for, having ranged and cast
the plot in his mind, he made small accompt of feet, of measures, or
cadences of verses, which indeed are but of small import in regard of
the rest. Since great Ronsarde and learned Bellay have raised our
French Poesie unto that height of honour where it now is: I see not
one of these petty ballad-makers, or prentise dogrell rymers, that
doth not bombast his labours with high- swelling . and
heaven-disimbowelling words, and that doth not marshall his cadences
verie neere as they doe.  Plus sonat quam valet,/1 'The sound is more
than the weight or worth.' And for the vulgar sort,there were never so
many Poets, and so few good: but as it hath been easie for them to
represent their rymes, so come they far short in imitating the rich
descriptions of the one, and rare inventions of the other.  But what
shall he doe, if he be urged with sophisticall subtilties about a
Sillogisme?  A gammon of Bacon makes a man drink, drinking quencheth a
mans thirst; Ergo, a gammon of bacon quencheth a mans thirst.  Let him
mock at it, it is more wittie to be mockt at than to be answered.  Let
him borrow this pleasant counter-craft of Aristippus: 'Why shall I
unbind that, which being bound doth so much trouble me?' Someone
proposed certaine Logicall quiddities against Cleanthes, to whom
Chrisippus said; use such jugling tricks to play with children, and
divert not the serious thoughts of an aged man to such idle
matters. If such foolish wiles, Contorta et aculeata sophismata,/2
'Intricate and stinged sophismes,' must perswade a lie, it is
dangerous: but if they proove void of any effect, and move him but to
laughter, I see not why he shall beware of them.  Some there are so
foolish that will go a quarter of a mile out of the way to hunt after
a quaint new word, if they once get in chace; Aut qui non verba rebus
aptant, sed res extstrinsecus arcessunt, quibus verba

----- 1 SEN.  Epist. xi. 2 CIC.  Acad.  Qu. 1. iv.

conveniant: 'Or such as fit not words to matter, but fetch matter from
abroad, whereto words be fitted.' And another, Qui ancicujus verbi
decore placentis vocentur ad id quod non proposuerant scribere: 'Who
are allured by the grace of some pleasing word, to write what they
intended not to write.' I doe more willingly winde up a wittie notable
sentence, that so I may sew it upon me, than unwinde my thread to go
fetch it.  Contrariwise, it is for words to serve and wait upon the
matter, and not for matter to attend upon words, and if the French
tongue cannot reach unto it, let the Gaskonie, or any other.  I would
have the matters to surmount, and so fill the imagination of him that
harkeneth, that he have no remembrance at all of the words.  It is a
naturall, simple, and unaffected speech that I love, so written as it
is spoken, and such upon the paper, as it is in the mouth, a pithie,
sinnowie, full, strong, compendious and materiall speech, not so
delicate and affected as vehement and piercing.

  Haec demum sapiet dictio quae feriet./2


  In fine, that word is wisely fit

  Which strikes the fence, the marke doth hit.

Rather difficult than tedious, void of affection, free, loose and
bold, that every member of it seeme to make a bodie; not Pedanticall,
nor Frier-like, nor Lawyer-like, but rather downe right,
Souldier-like. {PlainDealer+} As suetonius calleth that of Julius
Caesar, which I see no reason wherefore he calleth it.  I have
sometimes pleased myselfe in imitating that licenciousnesse or wanton
humour of our youths, in wearing of their garments; as carelessly to
let their cloaks hang downe over one shoulder; to weare their cloakes
scarfe or bawdrikewise, and their stockings loose hanging about their
legs. It represents a kind of disdainirul fiercenesse of these
forraine embellishings, and neglect carelesnesse of art:
{sprezzatura+} But I commend it more being imployed in the course and
forme of speech.  All manner of affectation, namely in the livelinesse
and

----- 1 SEN.  Epist. liii. 2 Epitaph on Lucan, 6.

libertie of France, is unseemely in a Courtier.  And in a Monarchie
every Gentleman ought to addresse himselfe unto a Courtiers carriage.
Therefore do we well somewhat to incline to a native and carelesse
behaviour.  I like not a contexture, where the seames and pieces may
be seen: As in a well compact bodie, what need a man distinguish and
number all the bones and veines severally?  Quae veritati operam dat
oratio, incomposita sit et simplex./1 Quis accuratete loquitur nisi
qui vult putide loqui/2 'The speach that intendeth truth must be
plaine and unpollisht: Who speaketh elaborately, but he that meanes to
speake unfavourably?' That eloquence offereth injurie unto things,
which altogether drawes us to observe it.  As in apparell, it as a
signe of pusillammitie for one to marke himselfe, in some particular
and unusuall fashion: so likewise in common speech, for one to hunt
after new phrases, and unaccustomed quaint words, proceedeth of a
scholasticall and childish ambition.  Let me use none other than are
spoken in the hals of Paris.  Aristophanes the Gramarian was somewhat
out of the way, when he reproved Epicurus, for the simplicitie of his
words, and the end of his art oratorie, which was onely perspicuitie
in speeche.  The imitation of speech, by reason of the facilitie of
it, followeth presently a whole nation.  The imitation of judging and
inventing, comes more slow.  The greater number of Readers, because
they have found one self-same kind of gowne, suppose most falsely to
holde one like bodie.  Outward garments and clokes may be borrowed,
but never the sinews and strength of the bodie.  Most of those that
converse with me, speake like unto these Essayes; but I know not
whether they think alike.  The Athenians (as Plato averreth) have for
their part great care to be fluent and eloquent in their speech; The
Lacedemonians endevour to be short and compendious; and those of Creet
labour more to bee plentifull in conceits than in language.  And these
are the best.  Zeno was wont to say,

----- 1 SEN.  Epist. xi. 2 Ib.  Epist. lxxv.

'That he had two sorts of disciples; the one he called ctNoAdyovs,
curious to learne things, and those were his darlings, the other he
termed xoyo(pfxovs, who respected nothing more than the language.  Yet
can no man say, but that to speake well, is most gracious and
commendable, but not so excellent as some make it: and I am grieved to
see how we employ most part of our time about that onely.  I would
frst know mine own tongue perfectly, then my neighbours with whom I
have most commerce.  I Must needs acknowledge, that the Greeke and
Latine tongues are great ornaments in a gentleman, but they are
pnrchased at over-high a rate.  Use it who list, I will tell you how
they may be gotten better, cheaper, and much sooner than is ordinarily
used, which was tried in myselfe.  My late father, having, by all the
meanes and industrie that is possible for a man, sought amongst the
wisest, and men of best understanding, to find a most exquisite and
readie way of teaching, being advised of the inconveniences then in
use; was given to understand that the lingring while, and best part of
our youth, that we imploy in learning the tongues, which cost them
nothing, is the onely cause we can never attaine to that absolute
perfection of skill and knowledge of the Greekes and Romanes.  I doe
not beleeve that to be the onely cause.  But so it is, the expedient
my father found out was this; that being yet at nurse, and before the
first loosing of my tongue, I was delivered to a Germaine (who died
since, a most excellent Physitian in France) he being then altogether
ignorant of the French tongue, but exquisitely readie and skilfull in
the Latine.  This man, whom my father had sent for of purpose, and to
whom he gave verie great entertainment, had me continually in his
armes, and was mine onely overseer.  There were also joyned unto him
two of his countrimen, but not so learned; whose charge was to attend,
and now and then to play with me; and all these together did never
entertaine me with other than the Latine tongue.  As for others of his
household, it was an inviolable rule, that neither himselfe, nor my
mother, nor man, nor maid-servant, were suffered to speake one word in
my companie, except such Latine words as every one had learned to chat
and prattle with me.  It were strange to tell how every one in the
house profited therein.  My Father and my Mother learned so much
Latine, that for a need they could understand it, when they heard it
spoken, even so did all the household servants, namely such as were
neerest and most about me.  To be short, we were all so Latinized,
that the townes round about us had their share of it; insomuch as even
at this day, many Latine names both of workmen and of their tooles are
yet in use amongst them.  And as for myselfe, I was about six years
old, and could understand no more French or Perigordine than Arabike;
and that without art, without bookes, rules, or grammar, without
whipping or whining, I had gotten as pure a Latin tongue as my Master
could speake; the rather because I could neither mingle or confound
the same with other tongues. If for an Essay they would give me a
Theme, whereas the fashion in CoIleges is, to give it in French, I had
it in bad latine, to reduce the same into good.  And Nicholas Grouchy,
who hath written De comitiis Romanorum, William Guerente, who hath
commented Aristotele: George Buchanan, that famous Scottish Poet, and
Marke Antonie Muret, whom (while he lived) both France and Italie to
this day, acknowledge to have been the best orator: all which have
beene my familiar tutors, have often told me, that in mine infancie I
had the Latine tongue so readie and so perfect, that themselves feared
to take me in hand.  And Buchanan, who afterward I saw attending on
the Marshall of Brissacke, told me, he was about to write a treatise
of the institution of children, and that he tooke the model and
patterne from mine: for at that time he had the charge and bringing up
of the young Earle of Brissack, whom since we have seene prove so
worthy and so valiant a Captaine.  As for the Greeke, wherein I have
but small understanding, my father purposed to make me learne it by
art; But by new and uncustomed meanes, that is, by way of recreation
and exercise.  We did tosse our declinations and conjugations to and
fro, as they doe, who by way of a certaine game at tables learne both
Arithmetic and Geometrie.  For, amongst other things he had especially
beene perswaded to make me taste and apprehend the fruits of dutie and
science by an unforced kinde of will, and of mine owne choice; and
without any compulsion or rigor to bring me up in all mildnesse and
libertie: yea with such kinde of superstition, that, whereas some are
of opinion that suddenly to awaken young children, and as it were by
violence to startle and fright them out of their dead sleepe in a
morning (wherein they are more heavie and deeper plunged than we) doth
greatly trouble and distemper their braines, he would every morning
cause me to be awakened by the sound of some instrument; and I was
never without a servant who to that purpose attended upon me.  This
example may serve to judge of the rest; as also to commend the
judgement and tender affection of so carefull and loving a father: who
is not to be blamed, though hee reaped not the fruits answerable to
his exquisite toyle and painefull manuring.  Two things hindered the
same; first the barrennesse and unfit soyle: for howbeit I were of a
sound and strong constitution, and of a tractable and yeelding
condition, yet was I so heavie, so sluggish, and so dull, that I could
not be rouzed (yea were it to goe to play) from out mine idle
drowzinesse.  What I saw, I saw it perfectly; and under this heavy,
and as it were Lethe- complexion did I breed hardie imaginations, and
opinions farre above my yeares.  My spirit was very slow, and would
goe no further, than it was fed by others; my apprehension blockish,
my invention poore; and besides, I had a marvelous defect in my weake
memorie; it is therefore no wonder, if my father could never bring me
to any perfection.  Secondly, as those that in some dangerous
sicknesse, moved with a kind of hope-full and greedie desire of
perfect health againe, give eare to every Leach of Emperike, and
follow all counsels, the good man being exceedingly fearefull to
commit any oversight, in a matter he tooke so to heart, suffered
himselfe at last to be led away by the common opinion, which like unto
the Cranes, followeth over those that go before, and yeelded to
custome: having those no longer about him, that had given him his
first directions, and which they had brought out of Italie.  Being but
six yeares old I was sent to the College of Guienne, then most
flourishing and reputed the best in France, where it is impossible to
adde any thing to the great care he had, both to chuse the best and
most sufficient masters that could be found, to reade unto me, as also
for all other circumstances partaining to my education; wherein
contrary to usuall customes of Colleges, he observed many particular
rules.  But so it is, it was ever a College.  My Latin tongue was
forthwith corrupted, whereof by reason of discontinuance, I afterward
lost all manner of use: which new kind of institution stood me in no
other stead, but that at my first admittance it made me to over-skip
some of the lower formes, and to be placed in the highest.  For at
thirteene yeares of age that I left the College, I had read over the
whole course of Philosophie (as they call it) but with so small
profit, that I can now make no account of it.  The first taste or
feeling I had of bookes, was of the pleasure I tooke in reading the
fables of Ovids Metamorphosies; for, being but seven or eight yeares
old, I would steale and sequester my selfe from all other delights,
only to reade them: Forsomuch as the tongue wherein they were written
was to me naturall; and it was the easiest booke I knew, and by reason
of the matter therein contained most agreeing with my young age. For
of King Arthur, of Lancelot du Lake, of Amadis, of Huon of Burdeaux,
and such idle time consuming and wit-besotting trash of bookes wherein
youth doth commonly ammuse it selfe, I was not so much as acquainted
with their names, and to this day know not their bodies, nor what they
containe: So exact was my discipline. Whereby I became more carelesse
to studie my other prescript lessons.  And well did it f.11 out fall
out for my purpose, that I had to deale with a very discreet master,
who out of his judgement could with such dexterite winke at and second
my untowardlinesse, and such other faults that were in me.  For by
that meanes I read over Virgils AEneados, Terence, Plautus, and other
Italian Comedies, allured thereunto by the pleasantnesse of their
severall subjects: Had he beene so foolishly-severe, or so severely
froward as to crosse this course of mine, I thinke verily I had never
brought any thing from the College, but the hate and contempt of
Bookes, as doth the greatest part of our Nobilitie.  Such was his
discretion, and so warily did he behave himselfe, that he saw and
would not see: hee would foster and increase my longing: suffering me
but by stealth and by snatches to glut my selfe with those Bookes,
holding ever a gentle hand over me, concerning other regular studies.
For, the chiefest thing my father required at their hands (unto whose
charge he had committed me) was a kinde of well conditioned mildnesse
and facilitie of complexion.  And, to say truth, mine had no other
fault, but a certaine dull languishing and heavie slothfullnesse.  The
danger was not, I should doe ill, but that I should doe nothing.  No
man did ever suspect I would prove a bad, but an uuprofitable man:
foreseeing in me rather a kind of idlenesse than a voluntary
craftinesse.  I am not so selfe-conceited but I perceive what hath
followed.  The complaints that are daily buzzed in mine eares are
these; that I am idle, cold, and negligent in offices of friendship,
and dutie to my parents and kinsfolkes; and touching publike offices,
that I am over singular and disdainfull.  And those that are most
injurious cannot aske, wherefore I have taken, and why I have not
paied? but may rather demand, why I doe not quit, and wherefore I doe
not give? {gift+} I would take it as a favour, they should wish such
effects of supererogation in me.  But they are unjust and over
partiall, that will goe about to exact that from me which I owe not,
with more rigour than they will exact from themselves that which they
owe; wherein if they condemne me, they utterly cancell both the
gratifying of the action, and the gratitude, which thereby would be
due to me.  Whereas the active well doing should be of more
consequence, proceeding from my hand, in regard I have no passive at
all.  Wherefore I may so much the more feetly dispose of my fortune,
by how much more it is mine, and of my selfe that am most mine owne.
Notwithstanding, if I were a great blazoner of mine owne actions, I
might peradventure barre such reproches, and justly upraid some, that
they are not so much offended, because I doe not enough, as for that I
may, and it lies in my power to doe much more than I
doe. {beneficence+} Yet my mind ceased not at the same time to have
peculiar unto it selfe well setled motions, true and open judgements
concerning the objects which it knew; which alone, and without any
helpe or communication it would digest. And amongst other things, I
verily beleeve it would have proved altogether incapable and unfit to
yeeld unto forces or stoope unto violence.  Shall I account or relate
this qualitie of my infancie, which was, a kinde of boldnesse in my
lookes, and gentle softnesse in my voice, and affabilitie in my
gestures, and a dexterite in conforming my selfe to the parts I
undertooke? for before the age of the

  Alter ab undecimo tum me vix ceperat annus. /1


  Yeares had I (to make even

  Scarce two above eleven.

I have under-gone and represented the chiefest parts in the Latin
Tragedies of Buchanan, Guerente, and of Muret; which in great state
were acted and plaid in our College of Guienne: wherein Andreas
Goveanus our Rector principall; who as in all other parts belonging to
his charge, was without comparison the

----- 1 VIRG.  Buc.  Ecl. viii. 39.

chiefest Rector of France, and my selfe (without ostentation be it
spoken) was reputed, if not a chiefe master yet a principall Actor in
them.  It is an exercise I rather commend than disalow in young
Gentlemen: and have seene some of our Princes (in imitation of some of
former ages) both commendably and honestly, in their pproper persons
act and play some parts in Tragedies. It hath heretofore been esteemed
a lawfull exercise, and a tolerable profession in men of honor, namely
in Greece.  Aristoni tragico actori rem aperit: huic et genus et
fortuna honesta erant: nec ars, quia nihil tale apud Graecos pudori
est, ea deformabat:/1 'He imparts the matter to Ariston a Player of
tragedies, whose progenie and fortune were both honest; nor did his
profession disgrace them, because no such matter is a disparagement
amongst the Grecians.' And I have ever accused them of imertinencie,
that condemne and disalow such kindes of recreations, and blame those
of injustice that refuse good and honest Comedians, or (as we call
them) Players, to enter our good townes, and grudge the common people
such publike sports.  Politike and wel ordered commonwealths endevour
rather carefully to unite and assemble their Citizens together; as in
serious offices of devotion, so in honest exercises of recreation.
Common societie and loving friendship is thereby cherished and
increased.  And besides, they cannot have more formal and regular
pastimes allowed them, than such as are acted and represented in open
view of all, and in the presence of the magistrates themselves: And if
I might beare sway I would thinke it reasonable, that Princes should
sometimes, at their proper charges, gratifie the common people with
them as an argument of a fatherly affection, and loving goodness
towards them: and that in populous and fequented cities, there should
be Theatres and places appointed for such spect-acles; as a diverting
of worse inconveniences, and secret actions.  But to come to my
intended purpose, there is no better way to allure the affection, and
to

----- 1 Liv.  Deo. iii. 1. iv.

entice the appetite: otherwise a man shall breed but asses laden with
Bookes, With jerks of rods they have their satchels full of learning
given them to keepe.  Which to doe well, one must not only harbor in
himselfe, but wed and marry the same with his minde.

CHAPTER 1.XXVI+ IT IS FOLLIE TO REFERRE TRUTH OR FALSEHOOD TO OUR
SUFFICIENCIE

IT is not peradventure without reason that we ascribe the facilitie of
beleeving and easines of perswasion us to simplicitie+ and ignorance:
For me seemeth to have learnt heretofore, that beliefe was, as it were
an impression conceived in our minde, and according as the same was
found either more soft, or of lesse resistance, it was easier to
imprint anything therein.  Vt necesse est lancem in libra ponderibus
impositis deprimi: sic animum perspicuis cedere./1 'As it is
necessarie a scale must go down the ballance when weights are put into
it, so must a minde yeeld to things that are manifest.' Forasmuch,
therefore, as the minde being most emptie and without counterpoize, so
much the more easily doth it yeeld under the burden of the first
perswasion.  And that's the reason why children, those of the common
sort, women, and sickefolks, are so subject to be mis-led, and so
easie to swallow gudgeons.  On the other side it is a sottish
presumption to disdaine and condemne that for false, which unto us
seemeth to beare no show of likelihood or truth which is an ordinarie
fault in those who perswade themselves to be of more sufficiency than
the vulgar sort.  So was I sometimes wont to doe, and if I heard any
body speake, either of ghosts walking, of foretelling future things,
of enchantments, of witchcrafts, or any other thing reported, which I
could not well conceive, or that was beyond my reach - Somnia,
terrores magicos, miracula, saqas, Nocturnos lemures, prtentaque
Thessala - /2

----- 1 CIC.  Acad.  Qu. 1. iv. 2 HOR. 1. ii.  Ep. ii. 208.

Dreames, magic terrors, witches, uncouth wonders.  Night walking
sprites, Thessalian conjur'd thunders - I could not but feele a kinde
of compassion to see the poore and seely people abused with such
follies.  And now I perceive that I was as much to be moaned myselfe:
Not that experience hath since made to discerne any thing beyond my
former opinions: yet was not my curiositie the cause of it, but reason
hath taught me, that so resolutely to condemne a thing for false and
impossible, is to assume unto himselfe the advantage, to have the
bounds and limits of Gods will, and of the power of our common mother
Nature tied to his sleeve: And that there is no greater folly in the
world than to reduce them to the measure of our capacitie and bounds
of our sufficiencie. {Pope+} If we terme those things monsters or
miracles to which our reason cannot attaine, how many such doe daily
present themselves unto our sight?  Let us consider through what
clouds, and how blinde-fold we are led to the knowledge of most things
that pass our hands: verily we shall finde, it is rather custome than
science that removeth the strangenesse of them from us

----- jam nemo fessus saturusqae videndi

Suspicere in coeli dignatur lucida templa./1

  Now no man tir'd with glut of contemplation

  Deignes to have heav'ns bright Church in admiration.

And that those things, were they newly presented unto us, wee should
doubtlesse deeme them as much or more unlikely and incredible than any
other.

         ----- si nunc primum mortalibus adsin

  Ex improviso, ceu sint objecta repente

  Nil magis his rebus paterat mirabile dici

  Ut minus ante quod auderent fore credere gentes./2


  If now first on a sudden they were here

  Mongst mortall men, object to eie or eare

  Nothing than these things would more wondrous bee, Or that, men
  durst lesse thinke, ever to see.

  He who had never seene a river before, the first he

----- 1 LUCRET. 1. ii. 2 Ib. 1042.

saw be thought it to be the Ocean: and things that are the greatest in
our knowledge, we judge them to be the extremest that nature worketh
in that kinde.

  Scilicet et fluvius qui non est maximum, ei est

  Qui non ante aliquem majorem vidit, ei ingens

  Arbor homoque videtur, et omnia de qenere omni

  Maxima quae vidit quisque, haec ingentia fingit./1


  A streame none of the greatest, may so seem

  To him, that never saw a greater streame

  Trees, men, seeme huge, and all things of all sorts, The greatest
  one hath seene, he huge reports.

Consuetudine oculorum assuescunt animi neque admirantur, neque
requirunt rationes earum rerum, quas semper vident:/2 'Mindes are
acquainted by custome of their eies, nor do they admire or enquire the
reason of those things which they continually behold.' The novelty of
things doth more incite us to search out the causes, than their
greatnesse: we must judge of this infinite power of nature, with more
reverence, and with more acknowledgement of our owne ignorance and
weaknesse.  How many things of small likelihood are there, witnessed
by men, worthie of credit, whereof if we cannot be perswaded, we
should at least leave them in suspence?  For to deeme them impossible,
is by rash presumption to presume and know how farre possibilitie
reacheth.  If a man did well understand, what difference there is
betweene impossibilitie, and that which is unwonted, and betweene that
which is against the course of nature and the common opinion of men,
in not beleeving rashly, and in not dis-beleeving easily; the rule of
Nothing too-much, commanded by Chilon, should be observed.  When we
finde in Froisard, that the Earle of Foix (being in Bearne) had
knowledge of the defeature at Iuberoth of King John of Castile, the
morrow next it hapned, and the meanes he alleageth for it, a man may
well laugh at it: And of that which our Annales report, that Pope
Honorius, the very same day that King Philip Augustus died at Mantes,
caused his publike funerals to be solemnized, and commanded

----- 1 LUCRET. 1. vi. 671. 2 CIC.  Nat.  Deor. 1. ii.

them to be celebrated throughout all Italie.  For, the authoritie of
the witnesses hath peradventure no sufficient warrant to restraine
us. But what if Plutrake, besides divers examples which he alleageth
of antiquitie, saith to have certainly knowne, that in Domitians time
the newes of the battle lost by Antonius in Germany many daies
journeies thence, was published in Rome, and divulged through the
world the very same day it succeeded: And if Caesar holds that it hath
many time happened, that report hath foregone the accident: Shall we
not say that those simple people have suffered themselves to be
cousened and seduced by the vulgar sort, because they were not as
clears-sighted as he?  Is there any thing more daintie, more
unspotted, and more lively than Plinies judgement, whensoever it
pleaseth him to make shew of it?  Is there any farther from vanitie?
I omit the excellencie of his learning and knowledge, whereof I make
but small reckoning: in which of those two parts doe we exceed him?
Yet there is no scholler so meanely learned but will convince him of
lying, and read a lecture of contradiction against him upon the
progresse of natures works.  And when wee read in Bouchet the myracles
wrought by the reliques of Saint Hillarie, his credit is not
sufficient to barre us the libertie of contradicting him: yet at
random to condemne all such like histories, seemeth to me a notable
impudencie. That famous man, Saint Augustine, witnesseth to have seene
a blinde child to recover his sight, over the reliques of Saint
Gervase, and Protaise at Milane: and a woman at Carthage to have
become cured of a canker by the sign of the holy Crosse, which a woman
newly baptized made unto her: and Hesperius a familiar friend of his,
to have expelled certain spirits that molested his house, with a
little of the earth of our Saviours sepulcher; which earth being
afterwards transported into a Church, a Paralitike man was immediately
therewith cured: and a woman going in procession, having as she past
by with a nose-gaie toucht the case wherein Saint Stevens bones were,
and with the same afterward rubbed her eies, she recovered her sight,
which long before she had utterly lost: and divers other examples,
where he affirmeth to have beene an assistant himselfe.  What shal we
accuse him of, and two other holy Bishops.  Aurelius and Maximmus,
whom he calleth for his witnesses?  Shal it be of ignorance, of
simplicity+, of malice, of facility, or of imposture?  Is any man
living so impudent, that thinks he may be compared to them, whether it
be in vertue or piety, in knowledge or judgement, in wisdome or
sufficiency?  Qui ut rationem nulllam afferent, ipsa auctoritate me
frangerent:/1 'Who though they alleaged no reason, yet might subdue me
with their very authoritie.' It is a dangerous fond hardinesse, and of
consequence, besides the absurd temerity it drawes with it, to despise
what we conceive not.  For, after that according to your best
understanding, you have established the limits of truth and bounds of
falsehood, and that it is found you must necessarily beleeve things
wherein is more strangenesse, than in those you deny; you have
alreadie bound your selfe to abandon them.  Now that which me thinkes
brings as much disorder in our consciences, namely in these troubles
of religion wherein we are, is the dispensation Catholikes make of
their beliefe.  They suppose to shew themselves very moderate and
skilfull, -when they yeeld their adversaries any of those articles now
in question.  But besides that, they perceive not what an advantage it
is for him that chargeth you, if you but once begin to yeeld and give
them ground; and how much that encorageth him to pursue his point:
those articles which they chuse for the lightest, are often times most
important.  Either a man must wholy submit himselfe to the authoritie
of our Ecelesiasticall policie, or altogether dispence himselfe from
it: It is not for us to determine what part of obedience we owe unto
it.  And moreover, I may say it, because I have made triall of it,
having sometimes used this libertie of my choice, and particular
election, not regarding certaine points of the observance of our
Church, which seeme to beare a

----- 1 CIC.  Div. 1. i.

face either more vaine or more strange; comming to communicate them
with wise men, I have found that those things have a most solid and
steadic foundation, and that it is but foolishnesse and ignorance,
makes us receive them with lesse respect and reverence than the rest.
Why remember we not, what, and how many, contradictions we finde and
feele even in our own judgement? How many things served us but
yesterday as articles of faith, which to day we deeme but fables?
Glory and curiositie are the scourges of our soules. The latter
induceth us to have an oare in every ship, and the former forbids us
to leave anything unresolved or undecided.

CHAPTER 1.XXVII+ OF FRIENDSHIP

CONSIDERING the proceeding of a Painters worke I have, a desire hath
possessed mee to imitate him: He maketh choice of the most convenient
place and middle of everie wall, there to place a picture, laboured
with all his skill and sufficienc-ie; and all void places about it he
filleth up with antike Boscage or Crotesko works; which are
fantasticall pictures, having no grace, bnt in the variety and
strangenesse of them.  And what are these my compositions in truth,
other than antike works and monstrous bodies, patched and hudled up
together of divers members without any certaine or well ordered
figure, having neither order, dependencie, or proportion, bu casual
and framed by chance?

  Definit in piscem mulier formosa superne./1


  A woman faire for parts superior

  Ends in a fish for parts inferior.

Touching this second point I goe as farre as my Painter, but for the
other and better part I am farre behinde: for my sufficiency reacheth
not so farre as that I dare undertake a rich, a polished, and,
according to true skill, an art-like table.  I have advised myselfe to
borrow one of Steven de la Boetic, who with this kinde of worke shall
honour all the world. It is a discourse he entitled
Voluntary_Servitude+, but those who have not knowne him, have since
very properly baptized the same, The Against-one. In his first youth
he writ, by way of Essaie, in honour of libertie_against_Tyrants+. It
hath long since beene dispersed amongst

----- 1 HOR.  Art.  Poet. 4.

men of understanding, not without great and well deserved
commendations: for it is full of wit and containeth as much learning
as may be: yet doth it differ much from the best he can do.  And if in
the age I knew him in, he would have undergone my dessigne to set his
fantasies downe in writing, we should doubtlesse see many rare things,
and which would very meerely approch the honour of antiquity: for
especially touching that part of natures gifts, I know none may be
compared to him.  But it was not long of him, that ever this Treatise
came to mans view, and I beleeve he never saw it since it first
escaped his hands: with certaine other notes concerning the edict of
Januarie, famous by reason of our intestine warre, which haply in
other places finde their deserved praise.  It is all I could ever
recover of his reliques (whom when death seized, he by his last will
and testament, left with so kinde remembrance, heire and executor of
his librarie and writings) besides the little booke, I since caused to
be published: To which his pamphlet I am particularly most bounden,
for so much as it was the instrumentall meane of our first
acquaintance.  For it was shewed me long time before I saw him; and
gave me the first knowledge of his name, addressing, and thus
nourishing that unspotted friendship which we (so long as it has
pleased God) have so sincerely, so entire and inviolably maintained
between us, that truly a man shall not commonly heare of the like; and
amongst our moderne men no signe of any such is seene.  So many parts
are required to the erecting of such a one, that it may be counted a
wonder if fortune once in three ages contract the like.  There is
nothing to which Nature hath more addressed us than to societie+.  And
Aristotle saith that perfect Law-givers have had more regardful care
of friendship+ than of justice+.  And the utmost drift of its
perfection is this.  For generally, all those amities nourished by
voluptuousnesse or profit, publike or private need, are thereby so
much the lesse faire snd and so much the lesse true amities, in that
they intermeddle other causes, scope, and fruit with friendship, than
it selfe alone: Nor doe those foure ancient kindes of friendships,
Naturall, sociall, hospitable, and venerian, either particularly or
conjointly beseeme the same.  That from children to parents may rather
be termed respect: Friendship is nourished by communication, which by
reason of the over-great disparitie cannot bee found in them, and
would happly offend the duties of nature: for neither all the secret
thoughts of parents can be communicated unto children, lest it might
engender an unbeseeming familiaritie betweene them, nor the
admonitions and corrections (which are the chiefest
offices_of_friendship+) could be exercised from children to parents.
There have nations beene found, where, by custome, children killed
their parents, and others where parents slew their children, thereby
to avoid the hindrance of enterbearing one another in after-times: for
naturally one dependeth from the ruine of another. There have
Philosophers beene found disdaining this naturall conjunction:
witnesse Aristippus, who being urged with the affection he ought his
children, as proceeding from his loyns, began to spit, saying, That
also that excrement proceeded from him, and that also we engendred
wormes and lice.  And that other man, whom Plutarke would have
perswaded to agree with his brother, answered, 'I care not a straw the
more for him, though he, came out of the same wombe I did.' Verily the
name of Brother is a glorious name, and full of loving kindnesse, and
therefore did he and I terme one another sworne brother: but this
commixture, dividence, and sharing of goods, this joyning wealth to
wealth, and that the riches of one shall be the povertie of another,
doth exceedingly distemper and distract all brotherly alliance, and
lovely conjunction: If brothers should conduct the progresse of their
advancement and thrift in one same path and course, they must
necessarily oftentimes hinder and crosse one another.  Moreover, the
correspondencie and relation that begetteth these true and mutually
perfect amities, why shall it be found in these?  The father and the
sonne may very well be of a farre differing complexion, and so many
brothers.  He is my sonne, he is my kinsman; but he may be foole, a
bad, or a peevish-minded man.  And then according as they are
friendships which the law and dutie of nature doth command us, so much
the lesse of our owne voluntarie choice and libertie is there required
unto it: And our genuine libertie hath no production more properly her
owne, than that of affection an amitie.  Sure I am, that concerning
the same I have assaied all that might be, having had the best and
most indulgent father that ever was, even to his extremest age, and
who from father to sonne was descended of famous house, and touching
this rare-seene vertue of brotherly concord very exemplare:

         ----- et ips

  Notus in fratres ommi paterni./1


  To his brothers knowne so kinde

  As to beare a fathers minde.

To compare the affection toward women unto it although it proceed from
our owne free choice, a man cannot, nor may it be placed in this
ranke: Her fire, I confesse it (

         ----- neque enim est dea nescia nostr

  Quae 1dulcem curis miscat amaritiem.)/2


  (Nor is that Goddesse ignorant of me

  Whose bitter-sweets with my cares mixed be.)

to be more active, more fervent, and more sharpe.  But it is a rash
and wavering fire, waving and divers: the fire of an ague subject to
fits and stints, and that hath but slender hold-fast of us.  In true
friendship, it is a generall and universall heat, and equally
tempered, a constant and setled heat, all pleasure and smoothnes, that
hath no pricking or stinging in it, which the more it is in lustfull
love, the more is it but a raging and mad desire in following that
which flies us,

----- 1 HOR. 1. ii.  Od. ii. 6. 2 CATUL.  Epig. xvi.

  Come seque la lepre il cacciator

  Al fredo, al caldo, alla montagna, al lito

  Ne piu l'estima poi che presa vede

  E sol dietro a chi fugge afretta il piede./1


  Ev'n as the huntsman doth the hare pursue,

  In cold, in heat, on mountaines, on the shore

  But cares no more, when he her ta'en espies

  Speeding his pace only at that which flies.

As soone as it creepeth into the termes of friendship, that is to say,
in the agreement of wits, it languisheth and vanisheth away: enjoying
doth lose it, as having a corporall end, and subject to satietie.  On
the other side, friendship is enioyed according as it is desired, it
is neither bred, nor nourished, nor increaseth but in jovissance, as
being spirituall, and the minde being refined by use custome.  Under
this chiefe amitie, these fading affections have cometimes found place
in me, lest I should speake of him, who in his verses speakes but too
much of it.  So are these two passions entered into me in knowledge
one of another; but in comparison never: the first flying a high, and
keeping a proud pitch, disdainfully beholding the other to passe her
points farre under it.  Concerning marriage besides that it is a
covenant which hath nothing free but the entrance, the continuance
being forced and constrained depending else-where than from our will,
and a match ordinarily concluded to other ends: A thousand strange
knots are therein commonly to be unknit, able to break the web, and
trouble the whole course of a lively affection; whereas in friendship
there is no commerce or busines depending on the same, but it selfe.
Seeing (to speake truly) that the ordinary sufficiency of women cannot
answer this conference and communication the nurse of this sacred
bond: nor seeme their mindes strong enough to endure the pulling of a
knot so hard so fast, and durable.  And truly, if without that, such a
genuine and voluntarie acquaintance might be contracted, where not
only mindes had this entire jovissance,

----- ARIOST. can. x. st. 7.

but also bodies, a share of the alliance, and where a man might wholly
be engaged: It is certaine, that friendship would thereby be more
compleat and full: {Portia+} But this sex could never yet by any
example attaine unto it, and is by ancient schooles rejected thence.
And this other Greeke licence is justly abhorred by our customes,
which notwithstandnlg, because according to use it had so necessarie a
disparitie of ages, and diference of offices betweene lovers, did no
more sufficiently answer the perfect union and agreement, which here
we require: Quis est enim iste amor amicitiiae? cur neque deformem
adolescentem quisquam amat, neque formosum senem? /1 'For, what love
is this of friendship? why doth no man love either a deformed young
man, or a beautifull old man?' For eyen the picture the Academie makes
of it, will not (as I suppose) disavowe mee, to say thus in her
behalfe: That the first furie, enspired by the son of Venus in the
lovers hart, upon the object of tender youths-flower, to which they
allow all insolent and passionate violences, an immoderate heat may
produce, was simply grounded upon an externall beauty; a false image
of corporall generation: for in the spirit it had no power, the sight
whereof was yet concealed, which was but in his infancie, and before
the age of budding.  For, if this furie did seize upon a base minded
courage, the meanes of its pursuit were riches, gifts, favour to the
advancement of dignities, and such like vile merchandice, which they
reprove.  If it fell into a more generous minde, the interpositions
were likewise generous: Philosophicall instructions, documents to
reverence religion, to obey the lawes, to die for the good of his
countrie: examples of valor, wisdome and justice; the lover endevoring
and studying to make himselfe acceptable by the good grace and beauty
of his minde (that of his body being long since decayed) hoping by
this mentatll societie to establish a more firme and permanent
bargaine.  When this pursuit attained the effect in due season (for by
not requiring in a lover, he should bring leasure and discretion in
his

----- 1 CIC.  Tusc.  Qu. iv. c. 33.

enterprise, they require it exactly in the beloved; forasmuch as he
was to judge of an internall beauty, of difficile knowledge, and
abstruse discovery) then by the interposition of a spiritual beauty
was the desire of a spiritual conception engendred in the beloved.
The latter was here chiefest; the corporall, accidentall and second,
altogether contrarie to the lover.  And therefore doe they preferre
the beloved, and verifie that the gods likewise preferre the same: and
greatly blame the Poet AEschylus, who in the love betweene Achilles
and Patroclus aseribeth the lovers part unto Achilles, who was in the
first and beardlesse youth of his adolescency and the fairest of the
Graecians.  After this general communitie, the mistris and worthiest
part of it, predominant and exercising her offices (they say the most
availefull commodity did thereby redound both to the private and
publike).  That it was the force of countries received the use of it,
and the principall defence of equitie and libertie: witnesse the
comfortable loves of Hermodius and Aristogiton.  Therefore name they
it sacred and divine, and it concerns not them whether the violence of
tyrants, or the demisnesse of the people be against them: To conclude,
all that can be alleaged in favor of the Academy, is to say, that it
was friendship, a thing which hath no bad reference unto the Stoical
definition of love: Amorem conatunt esse amicitiae faciendae ex
pulchritudinis specie./1 'That love is an endevour of making
friendship, by the show of beautie.' I returne to my description in a
more equitable and equall manner.  Omnino amicitiae, corroboratis jam
confirmatisque, ingeniis et aetatibus, judicandae sunt:/2 'Clearely
friendships are to be judged by wits, and ages already strengthened
and confirmed.' As for the rest, those we ordinarily call friendes and
amities, are but aequaintances and familiarities, tied together by
some occasion or commodities, by meanes whereof our mindes are
entertained.  In the amitie I speake of, they entermixe and confound
themselves one in the other, with so

----- 1 2 CIC.  Tusc.  Qu. ii,. c. 84. 2 Cic.  Amic.

universall a commixture, that they weare out and can no more finde the
seame that hath conjomed them together.  If a man urge me to tell
wherfore I loved him, I feele it cannot be expressed, but by
answering; Because it was he, because it was myself.  There is beyond
all my discourse, and besides what I can particularly report of it I
know not what inexplicable and fatall power a meane and a mediatrix of
this indissoluble union.  We sought one another before we had seene
one another, and by the reports we heard one of another; which wrought
greater violence in us, than the reason of reports may well beare; I
thinke by some secret ordinance of the heavens, we embraced one
another by our names.  And at our first meeting which was by chance at
a great feast, and solemne meeting of a whole towneship, we found our
selves so surprized, so knowne, so acquainted, and so combinedly bound
together, that from thence forward, nothing was so neer unto us as one
unto anothers.  He writ an excellent Latyne Satyre since published; by
which he excuseth and expoundeth the precipitation of our
acquaintance, so suddenly come to her perfection; Sithence it must
continue so short a time, and begun so late (for we were both growne
men, and he some yeares older than my selfe) there was no time to be
lost.  And it was not to bee modelled or directed by the paterne of
regular and remisse friendship, wherein so many precautions of a long
and preallable conversation are required. This hath no other Idea than
of it selfe, and can have no reference but tg itselfe.  It is not one
especiall consideration, nor two, nor three, nor foure, nor a
thousand: It is I wot not what kinde of quintessence, of all this
commixture, which having seized all my will, induced the same to
plunge and lose it selfe in his, which likewise having seized all his
will, brought it to lose and plunge it selfe in mine, with a mutuall
greedinesse, and with a semblable concurrance.  I may truly say, lose,
reserving nothing unto us, that might properly be called our owne, nor
that was either his or mine.  When Lelius in the presence of the
Romane Consuls, who after the condemnation of Tiberius Gracchus,
pursued all those that had beene of his acquaintance, came to enquire
of Caius Blosius (Who was one of his chiefest friends) what he would
have done for him, and that he answered, 'All things.' 'What, all
things?' replied he. 'And what if he had willed thee to burne our
temples?' Blosius answered, 'He would never have commanded such a
thing.' 'But what if he had done it?' replied Lelius.  The other
answered, 'I would have obeyed him.' If hee were so perfect a friend
to Gracchus as histories report, he needed not offend the Consuls with
this last and bold confession, and should not have departed from the
assurance hee had of Gracchus his minde.  But yet those who accuse
this answer as seditious, understand not well this mysterie: and doe
not presuppose in what termes he stood, and that he held Gracchus his
will in his sleeve, both by power and knowledge.  They were rather
friends than Citizens, rather friends than enemies of their countrey,
or friends of ambition and trouble.  Having absolutely committed
themselves one to another, they perfectly held the reines of one
anothers inclination: and let this yoke be guided by vertue and
conduct of reason (because without them it is altogether, impossible
to combine and proportion the same). The answer of Blosius was such as
it should be.  If their affections miscarried, according to my
meaning, they were neither friends one to other, nor friends to
themselves.  As for the rest, this answer sounds no more than mine
would doe, to him that would in such sort enquire of me; if your will
should command you to kill your daughter, would you doe it? and that I
should consent unto it: for, that heareth no witnesse of consent to
doe it: because I am not in doubt of my will, and as little of such a
friends will.  It is not in the power of the worlds discourse to
remove me from the certaintie I have of his intentions and judgments
of mine: no one of its actions might be presented unto me, under what
shape soever, but I would presently linde the spring and motion of it.
Our mindes have jumped so unitedly together, they have with so fervent
an affection consideredof each other, and with like affection so
discovered and sounded, even to the very bottome of each others heart
and entrails, that I did not only know his, as well as mine owne, but
would (verily) rather have trusted him concerning any matter of mine
than my selfe.  Let no man compare any of the other common friendships
to this.  I have as much knowledge of them as another, yea of the
perfectest of their kind; yet wil I not perswade any man to confound
their rules, for so a man might be decieved.  In these other strict
friendships a man must march with the bridle of wisdome and precaution
in his hand: the bond is not so strictly tied but a man may in some
sort distrust the same.  Love him (said Chilon) as if you hould one
day hate him againe.  Hate him as if you should love him againe.  This
precept, so abhominable in this soveraigne and mistris Amitie, is
necessarie and wholesome in the use of vulgar and customarie
friendships: toward which a man must employ the saying Aristotle was
wont so often repeat, 'Oh ye friends, there is no perfect friend.'  In
this noble commerce, offices and benefits (nurses of other amities)
deserve not so much as to bee accounted of: this confusion so full of
our wills is cause of it: for even as the friendship I beare unto my
selfe, admits no accrease, by any succour I give my selfe in any time
of need, whatsoever the Stoickes allege; and as I acknowledge no
thanks unto my selfe for any service I doe unto myselfe so the union
of such friends, being truly of perfect, makes them lose the feeling
of such duties, and hate, and expell from one another these words of
division and difference: benefit+, good deed, dutie, obligation,
acknowledgement, prayer, thanks, and such their like.  All things
being by effect common betweene them.  Wils, thoughts, judgements,
goods, wives, children, honour, and life; and their mutual agreement,
being no other than one soule in two bodies, according to the fit
definition of Aristotle, they can neither lend or give ought to each
other.  See here the reason why Lawmakers, to honour marriage with
some imaginary resenmblance of this divine bond, inhibite donations
between husband and wife; meaning thereby to inferre, that all things
should peculiarly bee proper to each of them, and that they have
nothing to divide and share together.  If in the friendship uhereof I
speake, one might give unto another, the receiver of the benefit
should binde his fellow.  Fore each seeking more than any other thing
to doe each other good, he who yeelds both matter and occasion, is the
man sheweth himselfe liberall, giving his friend that contentment, to
effect towards him what he desireth most.  When the Philosopher
Diogenes wanted money, he wvas wont to say that he redemanded the same
of his friends, and not that he demanded it: And to show how that is
practised by effect, I will relate an ancient singular example.
Eudamidas the Corinthian had two friends: Charixenus a Sycionian, and
Aretheus a Corinthian; being upon his death-bed, and very poore, and
his two friends very rich, thus made his last will and testament: "To
Aretheus, I bequeath the keeping of my mother, and to maintaine her
when she shall be old: To Charixenus the marrying of my daughter, and
to give her as great a dowry as he may: and in case one of them shall
chance to die before, I appoint the survivor to substitute his charge,
and supply his place.' Those that first saw this testament laughed and
mocked at the same; but his heires being advertised thereof, were very
well pleased, and received it with singular contentment. {Antonio+}
And Charixenus, one of them, dying five dayes after Eudamidas, the
substitution being declared in favour of Aretheus, he carefully and
very kindly kept and maintained his mother, and of the five talents
that he was worth he gave two and a halfe in marriage to one only
daughter he had, and the other two and a halfe to the daughter of
Eudamidas, whom he married both in one day.  This example is very
ample, if one thing were not, which is the multitude of friends: For,
this perfect amity I speake of, is indivisible: each man doth so
wholly give himself unto his friend, that he hath nothing left him to
divide else-where: moreover he is grieved thatbhe is not double,
double, triple, or quadruple, and hath not many soules or sundry wils,
that he might conferre them all upon this subject.  Common
friend-ships may bee divided; a man may love beauty in one, facility
of behaviour in another and wisdome in another, paternity in this,
fraternitie in that man, and so forth: but this amitie that possesseth
the soule, and swaies it in all soveraigntie, it is impossible it
should he double.  If two at one instant should require helpe, to
which would you run?  Should they crave contrary offices of you, what
order would you follow?  Should one commit a matter to your silence,
which if the other knew would greatly profit him, what course would
you take?  Or how would you discharge yourselfe? A singular and
principall friendship disolveth all other duties, and freeth all othet
obligations.  The secret I have sworne not to reveale to another
impart it unto him, who is no other but my selfe.  It is a great and
strange wonder for a man to double himselfe; and those that talke of
tripling know not, nor cannot reach into the height of it. 'Nothing is
extreme that hath his like.' And he who shal presuppose that of two I
love the one as wel as the other, and that they enter-love one
another, and love me as much as I love them: he multiplieth in
brother-hood, a thing most singular, and a lonely one, and than which
one alone is also the rarest to be found in the world.  The remainder
of this history agreeth very wel with what I said; for, Eudamidas
giveth us a grace and favor to his friends to employ them in his need:
he leaveth them as his heires of his liberality, which consisteth in
putting the meanes into their hands to doe him good. {Antonio+} And
doubtlesse the force of friendship is much more nobly shewen in his
deed than in Aretheus.  To conclude, they are imaginable effects to
him that hath not tasted them; and which makes me wonderfully to honor
the answer of that young Souldier to Cyrus, who enquiring of him what
he would take for a horse with which he had lately gained the prize of
a race, and whether he would change him for a Kingdome? 'No surely, my
Liege (said he), yet would I willingly forgoe him to gaine a true
friend, could I but finde a man worthy of so precious an alliance.' He
said not ill, in saying 'could I but finde.' For, a man shall easily
finde men fit for a superficial acquaintance; but in this, wherein men
negotiate from the very centre of their harts, and make no spare of
any thing, it is moste requisite all the wards and springs be
sincerely wrought and perfectly true.  In confederacies, which hold
but by one end, men have nothing to provide for, but for the
imperfections, which particularly doe interest and concerne that end
and respect.  It is no great matter what religion my Physician or
Lawyer is of: this consideration hath nothing in common with the
offices of that friendship they owe mee. So doe I in the familiar
acquaintances that those who serve me contract with me.  I am nothing
inquisitive whether a Lackey be chaste or no, but whether he be
diligent: I feare not a gaming Muletier, so much as if he be weake;
nor a hot swearing Cooke, as one that is ignorant and unskilfull; I
never meddle with saying what a man should doe in the world; there are
over man others that doe it; but what my selfe doe in the world.

  Mihi sic usus est: Tibi, ut opus est facto, face./1


  So is it requisite for me

  Doe thou as needfull is for thee.

Concerning familiar table-talke, I rather acquaint my selfe with and
follow a merry conceited humour, than a wise man: And in bed I rather
prefer beauty than goodnesse; and in society or conversation of
familiar discourse, I respect rather sufficiencye though without
Preud'hommie, and so of all things else.  Even as he that was found
riding on an hobby-horse, playing with his children besought him who
thus surprized him not to speake of it until he were were a father
himselfe, supposing the tender fondnesse and fatherly passion

----- 1 TER.  Heau. act. i. sc. 1, 28.

which then would posesse his minde should make him an impartiall judge
of such an action; so would I wish to speake to such as had tried what
I speake of: but knowing how far such an amitie is from the common
use, and how seld seene and rarely found, I looke not to finde a
competent judge. For, even the discourses, which sterne antiquitie
hath left us concermng this subject, seeme to me but faint and
forcelesse in respect of the feeling I have of it: And in that point
the effects exceed the very precepts of philosophie.

  Nil ego contulerim jucundo sanus antico./1


  For me, be I well in my wit

  Nought, as a merry friend, so fit.

Ancient Menander accounted him happy that had but met the shadow of a
true friend: verily he had reason to say so, especially if he had
tasted of any: for truly, if I compare all the rest of my forepassed
life, which although I have, by the meere mercy of God, past at rest
and ease, and except the losse of so deare a friend, free from all
grievous affliction, with an ever-quietnesse of minde, as one that
have taken my naturall and originall commodities in good payment,
without searching any others: if, as I say, I compare it all unto the
foure yeares I so happily enjoyed the deare society of that worthy
man, it is nought but a vapour, nought but a darke and yrksome light.
Since the time I lost him, quem semper acerbum Semper honoratum (sic
Dii voluistis) habebo./2

  Which I shall ever hold a bitter day

  Yet ever honour'd (so my God t'obey).

I doe but languish, I doe but sorrow: and even those pleasures, all
things present me with, in stead of yeelding me comfort, doe but
redouble the griefe of his losse.  We were copartners in all things.
All things

----- 1 HOR. 1. i.  Sat. vii. 44. 2 VIRG.  AEn. iii. 49.

were with us at halfe; me thinkes I have stolne his part from him.

                   ---- Nec fas esse ulla me voluptate hic frui

  Decrevi, tantisper dum ille abest meus particeps./1


  I have set downe, no joy enjoy I may.

  As long as he my partner is away.

I was so accustomed to be ever two, and so enured o be never single,
that me thinks I am but halfe my selfe.

  Illam mea si partem animae tulit,

  Maturior vis, quid moror altera,

  Nec charus aeque nec superestes

  Integer?  Ille dies utramque


  Duxit ruinam?/2

  Since that part of my soule riper fate reft me,

  Why stay I heere the other part he left me?

  Not so deere, nor entire, while heere I rest:

  That day hath in one ruine both opprest.


There is no action can betide me, or imagination possesse me, but I
heare him saying, as indeed he would have done to me; for even as he
did excell me by an infinite distance in all other sufficiencies and
vertues, so did he in all offices and duties of friendship.

  Quis desiderio sit pudor aut modus

  Tam chari capitis?/3


  What modesty or measure may I beare

  In want and wish of him that was so deare?


  O misero frater adempte mihi!

  Omnia tecum una perierunt gaudia nostra

  Quae tuus in vita dulcis alebat amor./4


  Tu mea, tu moriens fregisti commoda frater./5


  Tecum una tota est nostra sepulta anima

  Cujus ego interitu tota demente fugav

  Haec studia, atque omnes delicias animi./6


  Alloquar? audiero nunquam tua verba loquentem



----- 1 TER.  Heau. act. 1. sc. i, 97. 2 HOR. 1. ii.  Od. xvii. 7. 3
Id. 1. i.  Od. xxiv. 1. 4 CATUL.  Eleg. iv. 20, 92, 23, 95. 5
Ib. 21. 6 Ib.  94. 7 Ib. 25.

  Numquam eqo te vita frater amabilior

  Aspiciam post hac? at certe semper amabo./1


  O brother rest from miserable me

  All our delights are perished with thee

  Which thy sweet love did nourish in my breath

  With thee my soule is all and whole inshrinde

  At whose death I have cast out of my mind

  All my mindes sweet-meats, studies of this kind

  Never shall I, heare thee speake, sapeake with thee

  Thee brother, than life dearer, never see

  Yet shalt thou ever be belov'd of mee.

But let us a little heare this yong man speake, being but sixteene
yeares of age.

Because I have found this worke to have since beene published (and to
an ill end) by such as seeke to trouble and subvert the state of our
common-wealth, nor caring whether they shall reforme it or no; which
they have fondly inserted among other writings of their invention, I
have revoked my intent, which was to place it here.  And lest the
Authors memory should any way be interassed with those that could not
throughly know his opinions and actions, they shall understand that
this subject was by him treated of in his infancie, only by way of
exercise, as a subject, common, bare-worne, and wyer-drawne in a
thousand bookes.  I will never doubt but he beleeved what he writ, and
writ as be thought: for hee was so conscientious that no lie did ever
passe his lips, yea were it but in matters of sport or play: and I
know, that had it beene in his choyce, he would rather have beene
borne at Venice than at Sarlac; and good reason why: But he had
another maxime deepely imprinted in his minde, which was, carefully to
obey, and religiously to submit himselfe to the lawes, under which he
was borne.  There was never a better citizen, nor more affected to the
welfare and quietnesse of his countrie, nor a sharper enemie of the
changes, innovations, newfangles, and hurly-burlies of his time: He
would more willingly

----- 1 CATUL.  Eleg. i. 9.

have imployed the utmost of his endevours to extinguish and suppresse,
than to favour or further them: His minde was modelled to the patterne
of other best ages.  But yet in exchange of his serious treatise, I
will here set you downe another, more pithie, materiall, and of more
consequence, by him likewise produced at that tender age.

CHAPTER 1.XXVIII+ NINE AND TWENTIE SONNETS OF STEVEN DE LA BOETIE, TO
THE LADY OF GRAMMONT, COUNTESSE OF GUISSEN

MADAME, I present you with nothing that is mine, either because it is
already yours, or because I finde nothing therein worthy of you.  But
wheresoever these verses shall be seene, for the hononr which thereby
shall redound to them, by having this glorious Corisanda of Andoins
for their guide, I thought it good to adorne them with your worthy
name.  I have deemed this present fit for your Ladiship, forsomuch as
there are few Ladies in France, that either can better judgo of
Poesie, or fitter apply the use of it, than your worthy selfe: and
since in these her drooping daies, none can give it more life, or
vigorous spirit, than you, by those rich and high-tuned accords,
wherewith amongst a million of other rare beauties Nature hath richly
graced you.  Madame, these verses deserve to be cherished by you: and
I am perswaded you will be of mine opinion; which is that none have
come out of Gaskonie, that either had more wit or better invention and
that witnesse to have proceeded from a richer veine.  And let no
jealousie possesse you, inasmuch as you have but the remainder of that
which whilome I caused to be printed under the name of my Lord of
Foix, your worthy, noble and deare kinsman: For truly, these have a
kinde of livelinesse, and more piercing Emphasis than any other, and
which I cannot well expresse: as hee that made them in his Aprile
youth, and when he was enflamed with a noble glorious flame, as I will
one day tell your honour in your eare. The other were afterward made
by him in favour of his wife, at what time he wooed and solicited her
for marriage, and began to feele I wot not what martiall chilnesse and
husbands coldnesse.  And I am one of those whose opinion is, that
divine Poesie doth no where fadge so well, and so effectually
applaudeth, as in a youthfull, wanton, and unbridled subject. The
above mentioned nine and twentie Sonnets of Boetie, and that in the
former impressions of this booke were here set downe, have since beene
printed with his other works.

CHAPTER 1.XXIX+ OF MODERATION

As if our sense of feeling were infected, wee corrupt by our touching,
things that in themselves are faire and good.  We may so seize on
vertue, that if we embrace it with an over greedy and violent desire,
it may become vitious.  Those who say, 'There is never excesse in
vertue, because it is no longer vertue if any excesse be in it,' doe
but jest at words.

  Insani sapiens nomen ferat, aequus iniqui,

  Vltra quam satis est, virtutem si petat ipsam./1


  A wise man mad, just unjust, may I name

  More than is meet, een vertue if he claime.

Philosophy is a subtile consideration.  A man may love vertue too
much, and excessively demeane himselfe in a good action.  Gods holy
worde doth apply it selfe to this byase: Be not wiser than you should,
and be soberly wise.  I have seene some great men, blemish the
reputation of their religion, by shewing themselves religious beyond
the example of men of their quality. I love temperate and indifferent
natures.  Immoderation towards good, if it offend me not, it amazeth,
and troubleth me how I should call it.  Neither Pausanias his mother,
who gave the first instruction, and for her sonnes death brought the
first stone: Not Posthumius the Dictator, that brought his own sonne
to his end, whom the heat and forwardnesse of youth, had haply before
his ranke, made to charge his enemies, seeme so just as strange unto
me.  And I neather love to perswade or follow so savage and so deare a
vertue.

----- 1 HOR. 1. i.  Ep. vi. 15.

The Archer that overshoots his marke, doth no otherwise than he that
shooteth short.  Mine eics trouble me as much in climbing up toward a
great light, as to goe downe into the darke.  Callicles in Plato/1
saith, the extremitie of Philosophy to bee hurtfull: and perswades no
man to wade further into it than the bounds of profit: And that taken
with moderation, it is pleasant and commodious, but in the end it
makes a man wilde and vicious, disdainfull of religion and of common
lawes: an enemie of civill conversation; a foe to humane sensualitie
and worldly pleasures: incapable of all politike administration; and
unfit to assist others or to helpe himselfe: apt to be without revenge
buffeted, and baffled.  He saith true: for in her excesse, she
enthralleth our naturall liberties, and by an importunate wile,
diverts us from the faire and plaine path, which nature traceth out
for us.  The love we beare to women is very lawful; yet doth Divinitie
bridle and restraine the same.  I remember to have read in Saint
Thomas, in a place where he condemneth marriages of kinsfolkes in
forbidden degrees, this one reason amongst others: that the love a man
beareth to such a woman may be immoderate; for, if the wedlocke, or
husbandlike affection be sound and perfect, as it ought to be, and
also surcharged with that a man oweth to alliance and kindred; there
is no doubt but that surcease may easily transport a husband beyond
the bounds of reason.  Those Sciences that direct the manners of men,
as Divinitie and Philosophy, medleth with all things. There is no
action so private and secret may be concealed from their knowledge and
jurisdiction.  Well doe they learne that search and censure their
libertie. It is women who communicate their parts as much as a man
list to wantonize with them: but to phisicke them bashfulnesse forbids
them.  I will then in their behalfe teach husbands this, if there be
any too much flesht upon them: which is, that the verie pleasures they
have by the familiaritie of their wives, except moderately, used, they
are reproved: and not only is that, but in

----- 1 GORGIAS.

in any other unlawfull subjects, a man may trespasse in
licentiousnesse, and offend in excesse.  Those shamelesse endearings,
which the first heat suggests unto us in that sportfull delight, are
not only undecently, but hurtfully employed towards our wives.  Let
them at least learne impudence from another hand.  They are ever
broad-waking when we need them.  I have used no meanes but naturall
and simple instruction.  Marriage is a religious and devout bond: and
that is the reason the pleasure a man hath of it should be a moderate,
staied and serious pleasure, and mixed with severitie, it ought to bee
a voluptuousnesse somewhat circumspect and conscientious. And because
it is the chiefest of generation, there are that make a question,
whether it be lawfull to require them of copulation, as well when we
have no hope of children, as when they are over-aged, or big with
childe.  It is an homicide, according to Plato.  Certaine Nations (and
amongst others, the Mahometane) abhorre conjunction with women great
with childe.  Many also with those that have their monethly disease.
Zenobia received her husband but for one charge which done, all the
time of her conception she let him go at random, and that past, she
gave him leave to begin againe: a notable and generous example of
marriage.

Plato borroweth the narration of some needy and hunger-starven Poet of
this sport.  That Jupiter one day gave his wife so hot a charge,
impatient to stay till she came to bed, hee laid her along upon the
floors; and by the vehemence of his pleasure forgot the urgent and
weighty resolutions lately concluded upon with the other gods of his
celestiall court; boasting he found it as sweet at that time as he had
done when first he spoiled her of her virginitie by stealthe and
unknowne to their parents.  The Kings of Persia called for their wives
when they went to any solemne feast, but when much drinking -and wine
began to beat them in good earnest, they sent them to their chambers,
seeing they could no longer refrain, but must needs yeeld to
sensualitie lest they should be partakers of their immoderate lust,
and in their stead sent for other women, whom this duty of respect
might not concern.  All pleasures and gratifications are not well
placed in all sorts of people.  Epaminondas had caused a dissolute
young man to be imprisoned: Pelopidas intreated him, that for his sake
he would set him at libertie, but he refused him, and yeelded to free
him at the request of an harlot of his, which likewise sued for his
enlargement; saying, it was a gratification due unto a Courtizan, and
not to a Captaine.  Sophocles being partner with Pericles in the
Pretorship, seeing by chance a faire boy to passe by: 'Oh what a
beauteous boy goeth yonder!' saith he to Pericles: 'That speech were
more fitting another than a Pretor,' answered Pericles, 'who ought not
only to have chaste hands, but also unpolluted eies.' AElius Verus the
Emperour, his wife complaining that he followed the love of other
women, answered, be did it for conscience sake, for so much as
marriage was a name of honour and dignity, and not of foolish and
lascivious lust.' And our Ecclesiasticall Historie hath with honour
preserved the memorie of that wife which sued to be devorced from her
husband, because she would not second and consent to his over-insolent
and lewde embracements.  To conclude, there is no voluptuousuesse so
just, wherein excesse and intemperance is not reproachfull unto us.
But to speake in good sooth, is not a man a miserable creature?  He is
scarce come to his owne strength by his naturall condition, to taste
one only compleate, entire and pure pleasure, but he laboreth by
discourse to cut it off: he is not wretched enough, except by art and
study he augment his miserie.

  Fortunae miseras auximus arte vias./1


  Fortunes unhappie ill

  We amplifie by skill.

Humane wisdome doth foolishly seeke to be ingenious in exercising her
selfe to abate the number and dimmish the pleasure of sensualities
that pertaine to us: as it

----- 1 PROPERT. 1. iii.  El. vii. 32.

doth favorably and industriously in employing her devises, to paint
and set a luster on evils, before our eies, and therewith to recreate
our sense.  Had I beene chiefe of a faction, I would have followed a
more naturall course, which to say true, is both commodious and
sacred, and should peradventure have made my selfe strong enough to
limite the same.  Although our spirituall and corporall Physitians: as
by covenant agreed upon betweene them, finde no way of recoverie, nor
remedies for diseases of body and minde, but by torment, griefe and
paine, watching, fasting, haire- shirts, farre and solitarie exile,
perpetuall prison, roddes and other afflictions, have therefore beene
invented: But so, that they be truly afflictions, and that there be
some stinging sharpnesse in them: And that the successe be not as
Gallio's was, who having beene confined to the ile of Lesbos, newes
came to Rome that there he lived a merry life; and what the Senate had
laid upon him for a punishment, redounded to his commodity: whereupon
they agreed to revoke him home to his owne house and wife, strictly
enjoyning him to keepe the same, thereby to accommodate their
punishment to his sense and feeling.  For he to whom fasting should
procure health and a merrie heart, or he to whom a posion should be
more healthy than meat, it would be no longer a wholesome receipt, no
more than drugs in other medicines, are of no effect to him that takes
them with appetite and pleasure.  Bitternesse and difficultie are
circumstances fitting their operation.  That nature which should take
Reubarbe as familiar, should no doubt corrupt the use of it; it must
be a thing that hurts the stomacke, if it shal cure it: and here the
common rule failes, that infirmities are cured by their contraries:
for one ill cureth another.  This impression hath some reference to
this other so ancient, where some thinke they gratifie both heaven and
earth by killing and massaging themselves, which was universally
embraced in all religions.  Even in our fathers age; Amurath at the
taking of Isthmus, sacrificed six hundred young Greecians to hig
fathers soule; to the end their bloud might serve as a propitiation to
expiate the sinnes of the deceased.  And in the new countries
discovered in our daies yet uncorrupted, and virgins, in regard of
ours, it is a custome well nigh received everie where.  All their
idolles are sprinkled with humane bloud, not without divers examples
of horrible crueltie.  Some are burnt alive, and half roasted drawne
from the fire, that so they may pull out their hearts and entrails;
othersome, yea women, are fleade quicke, and with their yet-bleeaing
skins, they invest and cover others.  And no lesse of examples of
constant resolution.  For these wretched sacrifiable people, old men,
women and children, some daies before, goe themselves begging their
almes, for the offering of their sacrifice, and all of full glee,
singing, and dancing with the rest, they present themselves to the
slaughter.  The Ambassadours of the Kings of Mexico, in declaring and
magnifying the greatnesse of their Master to Fernando Cortez, after
they had told him that he had thirtie vassals, whereof each one was
able to levie a hundred thousand combatants, and that he had his
residence in the fairest and strongest Citie under heaven, added,
moreover, that he had fiftie thousand to sacrifice every yeare: verily
some affirme that they maintaine contiuall warres with certaine
mightie neighbouring Nations, not so much for the exercise and
training of their youth, as that they may have store of prisoners
taken in warre to supply their sacrifices. In another province, to
welcome the said Cortez, they sacrificed fiftie men at one clap.  I
will tell this one storie more: Some of those people having beene
beaten by him, sent to know him, and to intreat him of friendship. The
messengers presented him with three kinds of presents, in this manner:
"Lord, if thou be a fierce God, that lovest to feed on flesh and
bloud, here are five slaves, eat them, and we will bring thee more: if
thou be a gently mild God, here is incense and feathers; but if thou
be a man, take these birds and fruits, that here we present and offer
unto thee.'

CHAPTER 1.XXX+ OF THE CANIBALLES

AT what time King Pirrhus came into Italie, after he had survaid the
marshalling of the Armie, which the Romans sent against him: 'I wot
not,' said he, 'what barbarous men these are [for so were the Grecians
wont to call all strange nations 'but the disposition of this Armie,
which I see, is nothing barbarous.' So said the Grecians of that which
Flaminius sent into their countrie: And Philip viewing from a Tower
the order and distribution of the Romaine camp, in his kingdome under
Publius Sulpitius Galba.  See how a man ought to take heed, lest he
over-weeningly follow vulgar opinions, which should be measured by the
rule of reason, and not by the common report. I have had long time
dwelling with me a man, who for the space of ten or twelve yeares had
dwelt in that other worlde which in our age was lately discovered in
those parts where Villegaignon first landed, and surnamed Antartike
France.  This discoverie of so infinit and vast a countrie, seemeth
worthy great consideration.  I wot not whether I can warrant my selfe,
that some other be not discovered hereafter, sithence so many worthy
men, and better learned than we are, have so many ages beene deceived
in this.  I feare me our eies be greater than our bellies, and that we
have more curiositie than capacitie.  We embrace all, but we fasten
nothing but wind.  Plato/1 maketh Solon to report that he had learn't
of the Priests of the Citie of Says in AEgypt, that whilom, and before
the generall Deluge, there was a great land called Atlantis,

----- 1 PLAT.  Tim.

situated at the mouth of the strait of Gibraltar, which contained more
firme land than Affrike and Asia together.  And that the kings of that
countrie did not only possesse that Iland, but had so farre entred
into the maine land, that of the bredth of Affrike, they held as farre
as AEgypt; and of Europes length, as farre as Tuscanie: and that they
undertooke to invade Asia, and to subdue all the nations that compasse
the Mediterranean Sea, to the gulfe of Mare-Maggiore [the Black Sea],
and to that end they traversed all Spaine.  France and Italie, so
farre as Greece, where the Athenians made head against them; but that
a while after, both the Athenians themselves, and that great Iland,
were swallowed up by the Deluge.  It is verie likely this extreme
ruine of waters wrought strange alterations in the habitations of the
earth; as some hold that the Sea hath divided Sicilie from Italie,

  Haec loca vi quandam, et vasta convulsa ruin

  Dissiluisse ferunt, cum protinus utraque tellu

  Vna foret./1


  Then say, sometimes this land by that forsaken

  And that by this, were split, and ruine-shaken

  Whereas till then both lands as one were taken.

Cypres from Suria, the Iland of Negroponto from the maine land of
Beotia, and in other places joyned lands that were sundred by the Sea,
filling with mud and sand the chanels betweene them.

         ----- sterilisque diu palus aptaque remis

  Vicinas urbes alit, et grave sentit aratrum./1


  The fenne long barren, to be row'd in, no

  Both feeds the neighbour townes, and feeles the plow.

But there is no great apparence the said Iland should be the new world
world we have lately discovered; for it wellnigh touched Spaine, and
it were an incredible effect of inundation to have removed the same
more than twelve

----- 1 VIRG.  AEn. 1. iii. 414,416. 2 HOR.  Art.  Poet. lxv.

hundred leagues, as we see it is.  Besides, our moderne Navigations
have now almost discovered that it is not an Iland, but rather firme
land, and a continent, with the East Indias on one side, and the
countries lying under the two Poles on the other; from which if it be
divided, it is with so narrow a strait and intervall, that it no way
deserveth to be named an Iland: For, it seemeth there are certaine
motions in these vast bodies, some naturall, and other some
febricitant, as well as in ours.  When I consider the impression my
river of Dordoigne worketh in my time, toward the right shoare of her
descent, and how much it hath gained in twentie yeares, and how many
foundations of divers houses it hath overwhelmed and violently carried
away; I confesse it to be an extraordinarie agitation: for, should it
alwaies keepe one course, or had it ever kept the same, the figure of
the world had ere this beene overthrowne: But they are subject to
changes and alterations.  Sometimes they overflow and spread
themselves on one side, sometimes on another; and other times they
containe themselves in their naturall beds or chanels: I speak not of
sudden inundations, whereof we now treat the causes.  In Medoc alongst
the Sea-coast, my brother the Lord of Arsacke, may see a towne of his
buried under the sands, which the sea casteth up before it: The tops
of some buildings are yet to be discerned. His Rents and Demaines have
beene changed into barren pastures.  The inhabitants thereabouts
affirme, that some yeares since, the Sea encrocheth so much upon them,
that they have lost foure leagues of firme land: These sands are her
fore-runners.  And we see great hillocks of gravell moving, which
march halfe a league before it, and usurpe on the firme land.  The
other testimonie of antiquitie, to which some will referre this
discoverie, is in Aristotle (if at least that little booke of unheard
of wonders be his) where he reporteth that cortaine Carthaginians
having sailed athwart the Atlantike Sea, without the strait of
Gibraltar, after long time, they at last discovered a great fertill
Iland {Tempest+}, all replenished with goodly woods, and watred with
great and deepe rivers, farre distant from al land, and that both they
and others, allured by the goodnes and fertility of the same, went
thither with their wives, children, and household, and there began to
inhabit and settle themselves. The Lords of Carthage seeing their
countrie by little and little to be dispeopled, made a law and
expresse inhibition, that upon paine of death no more men should goe
thither, and banished all that were gone thither to dwell, fearing (as
they said) that in successe of time, they would so multiply as they
might one day supplant them, and overthrow their owne estate.  This
narration of Aristotle hath no reference unto our new found countries.
This servant I had, was a simple and rough-hewen fellow: a condition
fit to yeeld a true testimonie.  For, subtile people may indeed marke
more curiously, and observe things more exactly, but they amplifie and
glose them: and the better to perswade, and make their interpretations
of more validitie, they cannot chuse but somewhat alter the storie.
They never represent things truly, but fashion and maske them
according to the visage they saw them in; and to purchase credit to
their judgement, and draw you on to beleeve them, they commonly
adorne, enlarge, yea, and hyperbolize the matter.  Wherein is required
either a most sincere reporter, or a man so simple, that he may, have
no invention to build upon, and to give a true likelihood unto false
devices, and be not wedded to his owne will. {PlainDealer+} Such a one
was my man; who besides his owne report, hath many times shewed me
divers Mariners and Merchants, whom hee had knowne in that voyage.  So
am I pleased with his information, that I never enquire what
Cosmographers say of it.  We had need of Topographers to make us
particular narrations of the places they have beene in.  For some of
them, if they have the advantage of us, that they have seene
Palestine, will challenge a privilege, to tell us newes of all the
world besides.  I would have every man write what he knowes, and no
more: not only in that, but in all other subjects.  For one may have
particular knowledge of the nature of one river, and experience of the
qualitie of one fountaine, that in other things knowes no more than
another man: who neverthelesse to publish this little scantling, will
undertake to write of all the Physickes.  From which vice proceed
divers great inconveniences.  Now to returne to my purpose I finde (as
farre as I have beene informed) there is nothing in that nation that
is either barbarous or savage, unless men call that barbarisme which
is not common to them. As indeed, we have no other ayme of truth and
reason, than the example and Idea of the opinions and customes of the
countrie we live in.  There is ever perfect religion, perfect policie,
perfect and compleat use of all things.  They are even savage, as we
call those fruits wilde which nature of her selfe and of her ordinarie
progresse hath produced: whereas indeed, they are those which our
selves have altered by our artificiall devices, and diverted from
their common order, we should rather terme savage.  In those are the
true and most profitable vertues, and naturall properties most lively
and vigorous, which in these we have bastardized, apphing them to the
pleasure of our corrupted taste.  And if notwithstanding, in divers
fruits of those countries that were never tilled, we shall finde that
in respect of ours they are most excellent, and as delicate unto our
taste; there is no reason, art should gaine the point of honour of our
great and puissant mother Nature.  We have so much by our inventions
surcharged the beauties and riches of her workes, that we have
altogether overchoaked her: yet where ever her puritie shineth, she
makes our vaine and frivolous enterprises wonderfully ashamed.

  Et veniunt haderae sponte sua melius,

  Surgit et in solis formsior arbutus ants.

  Et volucres nulla dulcius arte canunt./1


  Ivies spring better of their owne accord

  Unhaunted spots much fairer trees afford

  Birds by no art much sweeter notes record.

All our endeavour or wit cannot so much as reach to

----- 1 PROPERT. 1. i.  El. ii. 10.

represent the nest of the least birdlet, it's contexture, beautie,
profit and use, no nor the web of a seely spider.  All things (saith
Plato) are produced either by nature, by fortune, or by art.  The
greatest and fairest by one or other of the two first, the least and
imperfect by the last. Those nations seeme therefore so barbarous unto
me, because they have received very little fashion from humane wit,
and are yet neere their originall naturalitie.  The lawes of nature
doe yet command them which are but little bastardized by ours, and
that with such puritie, as I am sometimes grieved the knowledge of it
came no sooner to light, at what time there were men that better than
we could have judged of it.  I am sorie Lycurgus and Plato had it not:
for me seemeth that what in those nations we see by experience, doth
not only exceed all the pictures wherewith licentious Poesie hath
proudly imbellished the golden age, and all her quaint inventions to
faine a happy condition of man, but also the conception and desire of
Philosophy. They could not imagine a genuitie so pure and simple as we
see it by experience; nor ever beleeve our societie might ne
maintained with so little art and humane combination.  It is a nation,
would I answer Plato, that hath no kinde of traffike, no knowledge of
Letters, no intelligence of numbers, no name of magistrate, nor of
politike superioritie; no use of service, of riches or of povertie; no
contracts, no successions, no partitions, no occupation but idle; no
respect of kindred, but common, no apparell but naturall, no manuring
of lands, no use of wine, corne, or mettle.  The very words that
import lying, falshood, treason, dissimulations, covetousnes, envie,
detraction, and pardon, were never heard of amongst them. {Gonzalo+}
How dissonant would hee finde his imaginarie common-wealth from this
perfection? Hos natura modos primum dedit./1

  Nature at first uprise

  These manners did devise.

----- 1 VIRG.  Geot-g. ii. 20.

Furtherrnore, they live in a country of so exceeding pleasant and
temperate situation, that as my testimonies have told me, it is verie
rare to see a sicke body amongst them; and they have further assured
me, they never saw any man there either shaking with the palsie, tooth
lesse, with eies dropping, or crooked and stooping through age.  They
are seated alongt the sea-coast, encompassed toward the land with huge
and steepie mountaines, having betweene both, a hundred leagues or
thereabout of open and champaine ground.  They have great abundance of
fish and flesh, that have no resemblance at all with ours, and eat
them without any sawces or skill of Cookerie, but plaine boiled or
broiled.  The first man that brought a horse thither, althongh he had
in many other voyages conversed with them, bred so great a horror in
the land, that before they could take notice of him, they slew him
with arrowes.  Their buildings are very long, and able to containe two
or three hundred soules, covered with barkes of great trees, fastned
in the ground at one end, enterlaced and joyned close together by the
tops, after the manner of some of our Granges; the covering whereof
hangs downe to the ground, and steadeth them as a flancke.  They have
a kinde of wood so hard, that ryving and cleaving the same, they make
blades, swords, and gridirons to broile their meat with.  Their beds
are of a kinde of cotten cloth, fastened to the house roofe, as our
ship-cabbanes: everie one hath his severall couch for the women lie
from their husbands.  They rise with the Sunne, and feed for all day,
as soone as they are up: and make no more meales atter that.  They
drinke not at meat, as Suidas reporteth, of some other people of the
East, which dranke after meales but drinke many times a day, and are
much given to pledge carowses.  Their drinke is made of a certaine
root, and of the colour of our Claret wines, which lasteth but two or
three daies; they drinke it warme: It hath somewhat a sharpe taste,
wholesome for the stomack, nothing heady, but laxative for such as are
not used unto it, yet verie pleasing to such as are accustomed unto
it.  In stead of bread, they use a certaine white composition, like
unto Corianders confected.  I have eaten some, the taste whereof is
somewhat sweet and wallowish.  They spend the whole day in dancing.
Their young men goe a hunting after wilde beasts with bowes and
arroes.  Their women busie themselves therewhil'st with warming of
their drinke, which is their chiefest office.  Some of their old men,
in the morning before they goe to eating, preach in common to all the
household, walking from one end of the house to the other, repeating
one selfe-same sentence many times, till he have ended his turne (for
their buildings are a hundred paces in length) he commends but two
things unto his auditorie.  First valour against their enemies, then
lovingnesse unto their wives.  They never misse (for their restrainte)
to put men in minde of this dutie, that it is their wives whiche keepe
their drinke luke-warme and well-seasoned.  The forme of their beds,
cords, swords blades, and woodden bracelets, wherewith they cover
their hand wrists, when they fight, and great Canes open at one end,
by the sound of which they keepe time and cadence in their dancing,
are in many places to be seene, and namely in mine owne house.  They
are shaven all over, much more close and cleaner than wee are, with no
other Razors than of wood or stone.  They beleeve their soules to be
eternall, and those that have deserved well of their Gods to be placed
in that part of heaven where the Sunne riseth, and the cursed toward
the West in opposition.  They have certaine Prophets and Priests which
commonly abide in the mountaines, and very seldome shew themselves
unto the people; but when they come downe there is a great feast
prepared, and a solemne assembly of manie towneshipes together (each
grange as I have described maketh a village, and they are about a
French league one from another.) The Prophet speakes to the people in
public, exhorting them to embrace vertue, and follow their dutie.  All
their moral discipline containeth but these two articles; first an
undismaied resolution to warre, then an inviolable affection to their
wives. {Houyhouyhnms+} Hee doth also Prognosticate of things to come,
and what successe they shall hope for in their enterprises hee neither
swadeth or disswadeth them from warre but if he chance to misse of his
divination, and that it succeed otherwise than hee foretold them, if
hee be taken, he is hewen in a thousand peeces, and condemned for a
false Prophet.  And therefore he that hath once misreckoned himselfe
is never seene againe.  Divination is the gift of God; the abusing
whereof should be a punishable imposture.  When the Divines amongst
the Scythians had foretold an untruth, they were couched along upon
hurdles full of heath or brushwood, drawne by oxen, and so manicled
hand and foot, burned to death.  Those which manage matters subject to
the conduct of man's sufficiencie are excusable, although they shew
the utmost of their skill.  But those that gull and conicatch us with
the assurance of an extraordinarie facultie, and which is beyond our
knowledge, ought to be double punished; first because they performe
not the effect of their promise, then for the rashnesse of their
imposture and unadvisednesse of their fraud.  They warre against the
nations that lie beyond their mountaines, to which they go naked,
having no other weapons than bowes or woodden swords, sharpe at one
end as our broaches are.  It is an admirable thing to see the constant
resolution of their combats, which never end but by effusion of blood
and murther: for they know not what feare or rowts are. {usthem+}
Every Victor brings home the head of the enemie he hath slaine as a
Trophey of his victorie, and fasteneth the same at the entrance of his
dwelling place.  After they have long time used and entreated their
prisoners well, and with all commodities they can devise, he that is
the Master of them; sommining a great assembly of his acquaintance;
tieth a corde to one of the prisoners armes, by the end whereof he
holds him fast, with some distance from him, for fear he might offend
him, and giveth the other arme, bound in like manner, to the dearest
friend he hath, and both in the presence of all the assembly kill him
with swords: whtch done, they roast and then eat him in common, and
send some slices of him to such of their friends as are absent.  It is
not, as some imagine, to nourish themselves with it (as anciently the
Scithians wont to doe), but to represent an extreme and inexpiable
revenge.  Which we prove thus; some of them perceiving the Portugales,
who had confederated themselves with their adversaries, to use another
kinde of death when they tooke them prisoners; which was, to burie
them up to the middle, and against the upper part of the body to shoot
arrowes, and then being almost dead, to hang them up; they supposed,
that the people of the other world (as they who had sowed the
knowledge of many vices amongst their neighbours, and were much more
cunning in all kindes of evils and mischiefe than they) under-tooke
not this manner of revenge without cause, and that consequently it was
more smartfull and cruell than theirs, and thereupon began to leave
their old fashion. to follow this.  I am not sorie we note the
barbarous horror of such an action, but grieved, that prying so
narrowly into their faults we are so blinded in ours.  I thinke there
is more barbarisme in eating men alive, than to feed upon them being
dead; to mangle by tortures and torments a body full of lively sense,
to roast him in peeces, and to make dogs and swine to gnaw and teare
him in mammocks (as we have not only read, but seene very lately, yea
and in our owne memorie, not amongst ancient enemies, but our
neighbours and fellow-citizens; and which is worse, under pretenee of
pietie and religion) than to roast and eat him after he is dead.
Chrysippus and Zeno, arch-pillars of the Stoicke sect, have supposed
that it was no hurt at all in time of need, and to what end soever, to
make use of our carrion bodies, and to feed upon them, as did our
forefathers, who being besieged by Caesar in the Citie of Alexia,
resolved to sustaine the famine of the siege, with the bodies of old
men, women, and other persons unserviceable and unfit to fight.

  Vascones (fama est) alimentis talibus usi

  Produxere ammas./1


  Gascoynes (as fame reports)

  Liv'd with meats of such sortes./

And Physitians feare not, in all kindes of compositions availefull to
our health, to make use of it, be it for outward or inward
applications. But there was never any opinion found so unnaturall and
immodest, that would excuse treason, treacherie, disloyaltie,
tyrannie, crueltie, and such like, which are our ordinarie
faults. {list_of_vices+} We may then well call them barbarous, in
regard to reasons rules, but not in respect of us that exceed them in
all kindes of barbarisme.  Their warres are noble and generous
{usthem+} and have as much excuse and beautie as this humane
infirmitie may admit: they ayme at nought so much, and have no other
foundation amongst them, but the meere jelousie of vertue.  They
contend not for the gaining of new lands; for to this day they yet
enioy that natural ubertie and fruitfulnesse, which without labouring
toyle, doth in such plenteous abundance furnish them with all
necessary things, that they need not enlarge their limits.  They are
yet in that happy estate as they desire no more than what their
naturall necessities direct them: whatsoever is beyond it, is to them
superfluous.  Those that are much about one age, doe generallv
enter-call one another brethren, and such as are younger they call
children, and the aged are esteemed as fathers to all the rest.  These
leave this full possession of goods in common, and without division to
their heires, without other claim or title but that which nature doth
plainely impart unto all creatures, even as shee brings them into the
world. {hunter_gatherer+} If their neighbours chance to come over the
mountaines to assaile or invade them, and that they get the victorie
over them, the Victors conquest is glorie, and the advantage to be and
remaine superior in valour and vertue: else have they nothing to doe
with the goods and spoyles of the vanquished, and so returne into
their countrie, where they neither

----- 1 JUV.  Sat. xv. 93.

want any necessarie thing, nor lacke this great portion, to know how
to enjoy their condition happily, and are contented with what nature
affoordeth them.  So doe these when their turne commeth.  They require
no other ransome of their prisoners, but an acknowledgement and
confession that they are vanquished.  And n a whole age, a man shall
not finde one that doth not rather embrace death, than either by word
or countenance remissely to yeeld one jot of an invincible courage.
There is none seene that would not rather be slaine and devoured, than
sue for life, or shew any feare.  They use their prisoners with all
libertie, thatl they may so much the more hold their lives deare and
precious, and commonly entertaine them with threats of future death,
with the torments they shall endure, with the preparations intended
for that purpose, with mangling and slicing of their members, and with
the feast that shall be kept at their charge.  All which is done, to
wrest some remisse, and exact some faint yeelding speech of submission
from them, or to possesse them with a desire to escape or run away;
that so they may have the advantage to have danted and made them
afraid, and to have forced their constancie+.  For certainly true
victorie consisteth in that only point. {courage+}

         ----- Victoria nulla es

  Quam quae confessos animo quoque subjugat hostes./1


  No conquest such, as to suppress

  Foes hearts, the conquest to confesse.

The Hungarians, a most warre-like nation, were whilome wont to pursue
their prey Tio longer than they had forced their enemie to yeeld unto
their mercy. For, having wrested this confession from him, they set
him at libertie without offence or ransome, except it were to make him
sweare never after to beare armes against them.  Wee get many
advantages of our enemies, that are but borrowed and not ours: It is
the qualitie of porterly-rascall, and not of vertue, to have stronger
armes and sturdier legs: Disposition is

----- 1 CLAUD.  De Sexto Consulata Honorii Paneg. v. 248,9.

a dead and corporall qualitie.  It is a tricke of fortune to make our
enemie stoope, and to bleare his eies with the Sunnes-light: It is a
pranke of skill and knowledge to be cunning in the art of fencing, and
which may happen unto a base and worthelesse man.  The reputation and
worth of a man consisteth in his heart and will: therin consists
truehonour+: Constancie+ is valour, not of armesand legs but of minde
and courage; it consisteth not of the spirit and courage of our horse,
nor of our armes, but in ours. He that obstinately faileth in his
courage.  Si succiderit, de genu pugnat./1 'If hee slip or fall he
fights upon his knee.' He that in danger of imminent death is no whit
danted in his assurednesse; he that in yeelding up his ghost beholding
his enemie with a scorn-efull and fierce looke, he is vanquished, not
by us, but by fortune+: he is slaine, but not conquered.  The most
valiant are often the most unfortunate.  So are there triumphant
losses in envie of victories.  Not those foure sister victories, the
fairest that ever the Sunne beheld with his allseeing eie, of Salamis,
of Plateae, of Mycale, and of Sicilia, durst ever dare to oppose all
their glorie together to the glorie of the King Leonidas his
discomfiture and of his men, at the passage of Thermopylae: what man
did ever run with so glorious an envie or more ambitious desire to the
goale of a combat, than Captaine Ischolas to an evident losse and
overthrow? who so ingeniously or more politikely did ever assure
himselfe of his welfare than he of his ruine? he was appointed to
defend a certaine passage of Peloponesus against the Arcadians, which
finding himselfe altogether unable to performe, seeing the nature of
the place and inequalitie of the forces, and resolving that whatsoever
should present it selfe unto his enemie, must necessarily be utterly
defeated: On the other side, deeming it unworthy both his vertue and
magnanimitie, and the Lacedemonian name, to faile or faint in his
charge, betweene these two extremities he resolved upon a meane and
indifferent course, which was this.  The

----- 1 SEN.  De Providentia, c. ii.

yo-ungest and best-disposed of his troupe he reserved for the service
and defencee of their countrie, to which hee sent them backe; and with
those whose losse was least, and who might best be spared, he
determined to maintaine that passage, and by their death to force the
enemie to purchase the entrance of it as deare as possibly he could;
as indeed it followed. For being suddenly environed round by the
Arcadians, after a great slaughter made of them, both himselfe and all
his were put to the sword.  Is any Trophey assigned for conquerours
that is not more duly due unto these conquered? A true conquest
respecteth rather an undanted resolution, an honourable end, than a
faire escape, and the honour of vertue doth more consist in combating
than in beating.  But to returne to our historie, these prisoners,
howsoever they are dealt withall, are so farre from yeelding, that
contrariwise during two or three moneths that they are kept, they ever
carry a cheerfull countenance, and urge their keepers to hasten their
triall, they outrigiously dote and-injure them.  They upbraid them
with their cowardlinesse, and with the number of battels they have
lost againe theirs.  I have a song made by a prisoner, wherein is this
clause, 'Let them boldly come altogether, and flocks in multitudes, to
feed on him; for with him they shall feed upon their fathers and
grandfathers, that heretofore have served his body for food and
nourishment: These muscles,' saith he, 'this flesh, and these veines,
are your owne; fond men as you are, know you not that the substance of
your forefathers limbes is yet tied unto ours?  Taste them welle for
in them shall you finde the relish of your owne flesh:' An invention,
that hath no shew of barbarisme.  Those that paint them dying, and
that represent this action, when they are put to execution, delineate
the prisoners spitting in their executioners faces, and making mowes
at them.  Verily, so long as breath is in their body they never cease
to brave and defie them, both in speech and countenance.  Surely in
respect of us these are very savage men: for either they must be so in
good sooth, or we must be so indeed; There is a wondrous difference
betweene their forme and ours.  Their men have many wives, and by how
much more they are reputed valiant so much the greater is their
number.  The manner and beautie of their marriages is wondrous strange
and remarkable: For, the same jealousie our wives have to keepe us
from the love and affection of other women, the same have theirs to
procure it.  Being more carefull for their husbands honour and content
than of any thing else, they endevour and apply all their industrie to
have as many rivals as possibly they can, forasmuch as it is a
testimonie of their husbands vertue.  Our women would count it a
wonder, but it is not so: It is vertue properly Matrimoniall, but of
the highest kinde.  And in the Bible, Lea, Rachell, Sara, and Iacobs
wives brought their fairest maiden servants into their husbands beds.
And Livia seconded the lustfull appetites of Augustus to her great
prejudice.  And Stratonica, the wife of King Dejotarus did not only
bring the most beauteous chamber-maide that served her to her husbands
bed, but very carefully brought up the children he begot on her, and
by all possible meanes aided and furthered them to succeed in their
fathers royaltie.  And least a man should thinke that all this is done
by a simple and servile or awefull dutie unto their custome, and by
the impression of their ancient customes authoritie, without discourse
or judgement, and because they are so blockish and dull-spirited, that
they can take no other resolution, it is not amisse we alleage some
evidence of their sufficiencie.  Besides what I have said of one of
their warlike songs, I have another amorous canzonet, which beginneth
in this sense: 'Adder stay, stay good adder, that my sister may by the
patterne of thy partie-coloured coat drawe the fashion and worke of a
rich lace, for me to give unto my love; so may thy beautie, thy
nimblenesse or disposition be ever preferred before all other
serpents.' The first couplet is the burthen of the song.  I am so
conversant with Poesie that I may judge this invention hath no
barbarisme at all in it, but is altogether Anacreontike.  Their
language is a kinde of pleasant speech, and hath a pleasing sound, and
some affinitie with the Greeke terminations.  Three of that nation,
ignorant how deare the knowledge of our corruptions will one day cost
their repose, securitie, and happinesse, and how their ruine shall
proceed from this commerce, which I imagine is already well advanced
(miserable as they are to have suffered themselves to be so cosened by
a desire of new-fangled novelties, and to have quit the calmnesse of
their climate to come and see ours), were at Roane in the time of our
late King Charles the ninth, who talked with them a great while.  They
were shewed our fashions, our pompe, and the forme of a faire citie;
afterward some demanded their advice, and would needs know of them
what things of note and admirable they had observed amongst us: they
answered three things, the last of which I have forgotten, and am very
sorie for it, the other two I yet remember.  They said, 'First they
found it very strange that so many tall men with long beards, strong
and well armed, as it were about the Kings person [it is very likely
they meant the Switzers of his gruard] would submit themselves to obey
a beardlesse childe, and that we did not rather chuse one amongst them
to command the rest.' Secondly (they have a manner of phrase whereby
they call men but a moytie one of another.){hunter_gatherer+} 'They
had perceived there were men amongst us full gorged with all sorts of
commodities, and others which, hunger-starved and bare with need and
povertie, begged at their gates: and found it strange these moyties so
needy could endure such an injustice, and that they tooke not the
others by the throate, or set fire on their houses.' {Houyhouyhnms+} I
talked a good while with one of them, but I had so bad an interpreter,
who did so ill apprehend my meaning, and who through his foolishnesse
was so troubled to conceive my imaginations, that I could draw no
great matter from him.  Touching that point, wherein I demanded of him
what good he received by the superioritie he had amongst his
countriemen (for he was a Captaine and our Mariners called him King),
he told me it was to march foremost in any charge of warre: further, I
asked him how many men did follow him, hee shewed me a distance of
place, to signifie they were as many as might be contained in so much
round, which I uessed to be about 4 or 5 thousand men: moreover,
demanded if when warres were ended, all his authoritie expired; he
answered, that hee had only this left him, which was, that when he
went on progresse, and visited the villages depending of him, the
inhabitants prepared paths and high-waies athwart the hedges of thefr
woods, for him to passe through at ease.  All this is not verie ill;
but what of that? They weare no kinde of breeches nor hosen.

CHAPTER 1.XXXI+ THAT A MAN OUGHT SOBERLY TO MEDDLE WITH JUDGING OF
DIVINE LAWES

THINGS unknowne are the true scope of imposture and subject of
Legerdemaine: forasmuch as strangenesse it selfe doth first give
credit unto matters, and not being subject to our ordinarie
discourses, they deprive us of meanes to withstand them.  To this
purpose, said Plato, 'it is an easier matter to please, speaking of
the nature of the Gods than of men: For the Auditors ignorance lends a
faire and large cariere and free libertie, to the handling of secret
hidden Matters.  Whence it followeth that nothing is so firmly
beleeved as that which a man knoweth least; nor are there people more
assured in their reports than such as tell us fables, as Alchumists,
Prognosticators, Fortune-tellers, Palmesters, Physitians, id genus
omne, 'and such like.' {Pope+} To which, if I durst, I would joyne a
rable of men that are ordinarie interpreters and controulers of Gods
secret desseignes, presuming to finde out the causes of every
accident, and to prie into the secrets of Gods divine will, the
incomprehensible motives of his works.  And howbeit the continuall
varietie and discordance of events drive them from one corner to
another, and from East to West, they will not leave to follow-their
bowle, and with one small pensill drawe both white and blacke.  There
is this commendable observance in a certaine Indian nation, who if
they chance to be discomfited in any skirmish or battel, they
publikely beg pardon of the Sunne, who is their God, as for an unjust
action, referring their good or ill fortune to divine reason,
submitting their judgement and dis- courses unto it.  It suffiseth a
Christian to beleeve that all things come from God, to receive them
from his divine and inscrutable wisdome with thanksgiving, and in what
manner soever they are sent him, to take them in good
part. {non_nobis+} But I utterly disalow a common custome amongst us,
which is to ground and establish our religion upon the prosperitie of
our interprises. {Lear+} Our beleefe hath other sufficient
foundations, and need not be authorized by events.  For the people
accustomed to these plausible arguments, and agreeing with his taste,
when events sort contrarie and disadvantageous to their expectation,
they are in hazard to waver in their faith.  As in the civil warres,
wherein we are now for religions sake. those which got the advantage
at the conflict of Rochelabeille, making great joy and bone-fires for
that accident, and using that fortune as an assured approbation of
their faction: when afterward they come to excuse their disaster of
Mont-contour and larnac, which are scourges and fatherly
chastisements: if they have not a people wholy at their mercy, they
will easily make him perceive what it is to take two kinds of corne
out of one sacke: and from one and the same mouth to blow both hot and
cold.  It were better to entertaine it with the true foundations of
veritie.  It was a notable Sea battel which was lately gained against
the Turkes under the conduct of Don Iohn of Austria.  But it hath
pleased God to make us at other times both see and feele other such,
to our no small losse and detriment. To conclude, it is no easie
matter to reduce divine things unto our ballance, so they suffer no
impeachment: And he that would yeeld a reason why Arrius and Leo his
Pope, chiefe Principals and maine supporters of this heresie, died
both at several times of so semblable and so strange deaths (for being
forced through a violent belly- ache to goe from their disputations to
their close-stoole, both suddenly yeelded up their ghosts on them),
and exaggerate that divine vengeance by the circumstance of the place,
might also adde the death of Heliogabalus unto it, who likewise was
slaine upon a privie.  But what?  Ireneus is found to be engaged in
like fortune: Gods intent being to teach us that the good have some
thing else to hope for, and the wicked somewhat else to feare, than
the good or bad fortune of this world: He manageth and applieth them
according to his secret disposition: and depriveth us of the meanes
thereby foolishly to make our profit.  And those that according to
humane reason will thereby prevaile doe but mocke themselves.  They
never give one touch of it, that they receive not two for it.  S.
Augustine giveth a notable triall of it upon his adversaries.  It is a
conflict no more decided by the armes of memorie than by the weapons
of reason.  A man should be satisfied with the light which it pleaseth
the Sunne to communicate unto us by vertue of his beames; and he that
shall lift up his eies to take a greater within his body, let him not
thinke it strange if for a reward of his over-weening and arrogancie
he loseth his sight. {Pope+} Quis hominum potesi scire consiliun Dei?
aut quis poterit cogitare, quid velit dominus?/1 'Who amongst men can
know Gods counsell, or who can thinke that God will doe?'

----- 1 Wisd. ix. 13.


CHAPTER 1.XXXII+ TO AVOID VOLUPTUOUSNESSE IN REGARD OF LIFE

I HAVE noted the greatest part of ancient opinions to agree in this:
That when our life affords more evill than good, it is then time to
die: and to preserve our life to our torment and incommoditie, is to
spurre and shocke the very rules of nature: as say the old rules.

GREEK /1

  Or live without distresse

  Or die with happinesse.


  K.Abyr@ Ov4aKe v o' p 'Ap,@ @b/2


  Tis good for them to die

  Whom life brings infamie.


  Kpeia@o, TZ,,.4 C@v/3


  'Tis better not to live

  Than wretchedly not thrive.

But to drive off the contempt of death to such a degree as to imploy
it to distract and remove himselfe from honours, riches, greatnesse,
and other goods and favours, which wee call the goods of fortune: as
if reason had not enough to doe to perswade us to forgoe and leave
them, without adding this new surcharge unto it, I had neither seene
the same commanded nor practised untill such time as one place
ofSeneca+ came to my hands, wherein counselling Lucilius (a man
mightie and in great authoritie about the Emperour) to change this
voluptuous and pompous life, and to withdraw himselfe from this
ambition of the world, to some solitarie, quiet, and philosophicall
life: about

----- 1 Gnom.  Graec. 0. 2 ib. 260 3 STOBEUS, SERM. cxiii.

which Lucilius alleaged some difficulties: 'My advice is' (saith he)
'that either thou leave and quit that life, or thy life altogether:
But I perswade thee to follow the gentler way, and rather to-untie
than breake what thou hast so ill knit: alwaies provided thou breake
it, if thou canst not otherwise untie the same.' Ihere is no man so
base minded that loveth not rather to fall once than ever to remaine
in feare of falling.  I should have deemed this counsell agreeing with
the Stoickes rudenes; But it is more strange it should be borrowed of
Epicurus, who to that purpose writeth consonant to this unto
Idomeneus.  Yet thinke I to have noted some such like thing amongst
our owne people, but with Christian moderation.  Saint Hilarie, Bishop
of Poitiers, a famous enemie of the Arrian heresie, being in Syria,
was advertised that Abra, his only daughter, whom hee had left at home
with her mother, was by the greatest Lords of the countrie solicited
and sued unto for marriage, as a damosell very well brought up, faire,
rich, and in the prime of her age: he writ unto her (as we see) that
she should remove her affections from all the pleasures and advantages
might be presented her; for in his voyage he had found a greater and
worthier match or husband of far higher power and magnificence, who
should present and endow her with roabes and jewels of unvaluable
price.  His purpose was to make her lose the appetite and use of daily
pleasures, and wholly to wed her unto God.  Also which, deeming his
daughters death, the shortest and most assured way, he never ceased by
vowes, prayers and orisons, humbly to beseech God to take her out of
this world, and to call her to his mercie, as it came to passe; for
shee deceased soone after his returne, whereof he shewed manifest
tokens of singular gladnesse.  This man seemeth to endeere himselfe
above others, in that at first sight he addresseth himselfe to this
meane, which they never embrace but subsidiarily, and sithence it is
towards his only daughter.  But I will not omit the successe of this
storie, although it be not to my purpose.  Saint Hilaries wife, having
understood_ by him how her daughters death succeeded with his intent
and will, and how much more happy it was for her to be dislodged from
out this world than still to abide therein, conceived so lively an
apprehension of the eternall and heavenly blessednesse, that with
importunate instancie she solicited her husband to doe as much for
her.  And God, at their earnest entreatie and joynt-common prayers,
having soone after taken her unto himselfe, it was a death embraced
with singular and mutuall contentment to both.

CHAPTER 1.XXXIII+ THAT FORTUNE+ IS OFTENTIMES MET WITHALL IN PURSUIT
OF REASON

THE inconstancie of Fortunes diverse wavering is the cause shee should
present us with all sorts of visages.  Is there any action of justice
more manifest than this?  Cesar Borgia, Duke of Valentinois, having
resolved to Adrian, Cardinall of Cornetto, with whom Pope Alexander
the sixth, his father, and he were to sup that night in Vaticane, sent
certaine bottles of empoysoned wine before, and gave his butler great
charge to have a speciall care of it.  The Pope comming thither before
his sonne, and calling for some drinke, the butler supposing the wine
had beene so carefully commended unto him for the goodnesse of it,
immediately presented some unto the Pope, who whilest he was drinking
his sonne came in, and never imagining his bottles had beene toucht,
tooke the cup and pledged his father, so that the Pope died presently;
and the sonne, after he had long time been tormented with sicknesse,
recovered to another worse fortune.  It somtimes seemeth that when we
least think on her, shee is pleased to sport with us.  The Lord of
Estree, then guidon to the Lord of Vandosme, and the Lord of Liques,
Lieutenant to the Duke of Ascot, both servants to the Lord of
Foungueselles sister, albeit of contrarie factions (as it hapneth
among neigbouring bordurers) the Lord of Liques got her to wife: But
even upon his wedding day, and which is worse, before his going to
bed, the bridegroome desiring to breake a staffe in favour of his new
Bride and Mistris, went out to skirmish neere to Saint Omer where the
Lord of Estree being the stronger, tooke him prisoner, and to endeare
his advantage, the Lady her selfe was faine,

  Conjugis ante coacta novi dimittere collum,

  Quam veniens una atque altera rursus heyems.

  Noctibus in longis avidum saturraset amorem,/1


  Her new feeres necke forced was she to forgoe

  Ere winters one and two, returning sloe

  In long nights had ful-fil'

  Her love so eager wil'd,


in courtesie, to sue unto him for the deliverie of his prisoner, which
he granted; the French Nobilitle never refusing Ladies any kindnesse.
Seemeth she not to be a right artist?  Constantine, the sonne of
Helen, founded the Empire of Constantinople, and so, many ages after,
Constantine the sonne of Helen ended the same.  She is sometimes
pleased to envie our miracles: we hold an opinion, that King Clovis
besieging Angoulesme, the wals by a divine favour fell of themselves.
And Bouchet borroweth of some author, that King Robert beleagring a
Citie, and leaving secretly stolne away from the siege to Orleans,
there to solemnize the feasts of Saint Aignan, as he was in his
earnest devotion, upon a certaine passage of the Masse, the walles of
the towne, besieged without any batterie, fell flat to the ground. She
did altogether contrarie in our warres of Millane; for, Captaine
Rense, beleagring the Citie of Eronna for us, and having caused a
forcible mine to be wrought under a great curtine of the walls, by
force whereof, it being violently flowne up from out the ground, did
notwithstanding, whole and unbroken, fall so right into his foundation
againe, that the besieged found no inconvenience at all by it.  She
sometimes playeth the Physitian. Iason Phereus, being utterly forsaken
of all Physitians, by reason of an impostume he had in his breast, and
desirous to be rid of it, though it were by death, as one of the
forlorne hope, rusht into a battel amongst the thickest throng of his
enemies, where he was so rightly wounded acrosse the body, that his
impostume brake, and he was cured.  Did shee not

----- 1 CATUL.  Eleg. iv. 81.

exceed the Painter Protogenes in the skill of his trade? who having
perfected the image of a wearie and panting dog, and in all parts
over- tired, to his content, but being unable, as he desired, lively
to represent the drivel or slaver of his mouth, vexed against his owne
worke, took his spunge, and, moist as it was with divers colours,
threw it at the picture, with purpose to blot and deface all hee had
done, fortune+ did so fitly and rightly carrie the same towards the
dogs chaps that there it perfectly finished what his art could never
attaine unto.  Doth she not sometimes addresse and correct our
counsels?  Isabell Queene of England, being to repasse from Zeland
into her Kingdome with an armie, in favour of her sonne against her
husband, had utterly beene cast away had she come unto the port
intended, bemg there expected by her enemies; but fortune, against her
will, brought her to another place, where shee safely landed.  And
that ancient fellow, who, hurling a stone at a dog, misst him, and
there withall hit and slew his step-daine, had she not reason to
pronounce this verse,

  T.@ToA.Tov @,pr-Y KaX,,'- igovheoeTm.


  Chance of it selfe, than wee,

  Doth better say and see?

Fortune hath better advice than wee.  Icetas had practised and
suborned two souldiers to kill Timoleon, then residing at Adrane in
Sicily.  They appointed a time to doe, as he should be assisting at
some sacrifice; and scattering themselves amongst the multitude, as
they were winking one upon another, to shew how they had a verie fit
opportunitie to doe the deed, loe here a third man, that with a huge
blow of a sword striketh one of them over the head, and fels him dead
to the ground and so runs away.  His fellow, supposing himselfe
discovered and undone, runs to the altar, suing for sanctuarie, with
promise to confesse the truth even as he was declaring the
conspiracie, behold the third man, who had likewise beene taken, whom
as a murtherer the people tugged and haled through the throng toward
Timoleon and the chiefest of the assembly, where he humbly calleth for
mercy, alleaging that he had justly murthered the murtherer of his
father, whom his good chance was to finde there, averring by good
witnesses before them all, that in the Citie of the Leontines, his
father had beene proditoriously slaine by him on whom he had now
revenged himseIfe. In neede whereof, because he had been so fortunate
in seeking to right his fathers untimely death, to save the common
father of the Sicilians from so imminent a danger, he had ten Attike
mines awarded him.  Thus Fortune in her directions exceedeth all the
rules of humane wisdome.  But to conclude: is not an expresse
application of her favour, goodnesse, and singular pietie manifestly
discovered in this action?  Ignatius, the Father and the Sonne, both
banished by proscription by the Triumvirs of Rome, resolved on this
generous act, to yeeld their lives one into anothers hands, and
therebi frustrate the tyrants cruelty.  They furiously, with their
keene rapiers drawne, ran one against another: Fortune so directed
their points that each received his mortall stroke; adding to the
honour of seld-seene an amity, that they had just so much strength
left them to draw their armed and bloudy hands from out their goared
wounds, in that plight so fast to embrace and so hard to claspe one
another, that the hangmen were forced, at one stroke and together, to
cut off both their heads; leaving their bodies for ever tied in so
honourable+ a knot, and their wounds so joined, that they lovingly
drew and suckt each others bloud, breath, and life.

CHAPTER 1.XXXIV+ OF A DEFECT IN OUR POLICIES

MY whilome father, a man who had no helpe but from experience and his
owne nature, yet of an unspotted judgement, hath heretofore told me,
that he much desired to bring in this custome, which is, that in all
cities there should be a certaine appointed place to which, whosoever
should have need of any thing, might come and cause his business to be
registered by some officer appointed for that purpose: As, for
example, if one have pearls to sell, he should say, I seeke to sell
some pearls: and another, I seeke to buy some pearls.  Such a man
would faine have companie to travell to Paris; such a one enquireth
for a servant of this or that qualitie; such a one seeketh for a
master, another a workman; some this, some that; every man as he
needed.  And it seemeth that this meanes of enter-warning one another
would bring no small commoditie into common commerce and societie; for
there are ever conditions that enter-seeke one another, and because
they understand not one another, they leave men in great necessities.
I understand, to the infamous reproach of our age, that even in our
sight two most excellent men in knowledge having miserably perished
for want of food and other necessaries: Lilius Gregorius Giraldus in
Italy, and Sebastianus Castalio in Germanie.  And I verily beleeve
there are many thousands who, had they knowne or understood their
wants, would sither have sent for them, and with large stipends
entertained them, or would have convaid them succour, where ever they
had beene.  The world is not so generally corrupted, but I know some
that would earnestly wish, and with harty affections desire, the goods
which their forefathers have left them, might, so long as it shall
please fortune they may enjoy them, be emploied for the reliefe of
rare and supply of excellent mens necessitie, and such as for any kind
of worth and vertue are remarkable; many of which are daily seene to
be pursued by ill fortune even to the utmost extremitie, and that
would take such order for them, as, had they not their ease and
content, it might only be imputed to their want of reason or lacke of
discretion. {lberality+} In this economicke or houshold order, my
father had this order, which I can commend, but no way follow: which
was, that besides the day-booke of household affaires, wherein are
registred at least expenses, paiments, gifts, bargains and sales, that
require not a Notaries hand to them, which booke a receiver had the
keeping of: he appointed another journall-booke to one of his
servants, who was his clerke, wherein he should insert and orderly set
downe all accidents worthy of the noting. and day by day register the
memories of the historie of his house: a thing very pleasant to read
when time began to weare out the remembrance of them, and fit for us
to passe the time withall, and to resolve some doubts: when such a
worke was begun, when ended, what way or course was taken, what
accidents hapned how long it continued; all our voyages, where, an how
long we were from home; our marriages, who died, and when; the
receiving of good or bad tidings, who came, who went, changing or
removing of household officers, taking of new or discharging of old
servants, and such like matters. An ancient custome, and which I would
have all men use and bring into fashion againe in their several homes:
and I repent my selfe I have so foolishly neglected the same.

CHAPTER 1.XXXV+ OF THE USE OF APPARELL

WHATSOEVER I aime at, I must needs force some of customes
contradictions, so carefully hath she barred all our entrances.  I was
devising in this chil-cold season whether the fashion of these late
discovered nations to go naked, be a custome forced by the hot
temperature of the ayre, as we say of the Indians and Moores, or
whether it be an original manner of mankind. Men of understanding,
forasmuch as whatsoever is contained under heaven (as saith the Holy
Writ) is subject to the same lawes, are wont in such like
considerations, where naturall lawes are to be distinguished from
those invented by man, to have recourse to the generall policie of the
world, where nothing that is counterfet can be admitted.  Now, all
things being exactly furnished else-whence with all necessaries to
maintaine this being, it is not to be imagined that we alone should be
produced in a defective and indigent estate, yea, and in such a one as
cannot be maintained without forrain helpe.  My opinion is, that even
as all plants, trees, living creatures, and whatsoever hath life, is
naturally seene furnished with sufficient furmture to defend it selfe
from the injurie of all wethers:

  Proptereague fere res omnes, aut corio sunt

  Aut seta, aut conchis, aut cano, aut cortice tectae./1


  Therefore all things almost we cover'd marke,

  With hide, or haire, or shels, or brawne, or barke.

Even so were we.  But as those who by an artificiall light extinguish
the brightnesse of the day, we have

----- 1 LUC. 1. iv. 932.

quenched our proper means by such as we have borrowed.  And wee may
easily discerne that only custome makes that seeme impossible unto us
which is not so: For of those nations that have no knowledge of
cloaths, some are found situated under the same heaven, and climate or
parallel, that we are in, and more cold and sharper than ours.
Moreover, the tenderest parts of us are ever bare and naked, as our
eyes, face, mouth nose, and eares; and our country swaines (as our
fore, fathers wont) most of them at this day goe bare-breasted downe
to the navill.  Had we beene borne needing petticoats and breeches,
there is no doubt but Nature would have armed that which she hath left
to the batteries of seasons and furie of wethers with some thicker
skin or hide, as shee hath done our fingers ends and the soales of our
feet.  Why seemes this hard to be believed?  Betweene my fashion of
apparell and that of one of my countrie-clownes, I find much more
difference betweene him and me than betweene his fashion and that of a
man who is cloathed but with his bare skin. 'How many men (especially
in Turkie) go ever naked for devotions sake?' a certaine man demanded
of one of our loytring rogues whom in the deep of frosty Winter he saw
wandering up and downe with nothing but his shirt about him, and yet
as blithe and lusty as another that keepes himselfe muffled and wrapt
in wanne furres up to the eares; how he could have patience to go
so. 'And have not you, good Sir' (answered he) 'your face all bare?
Imagine I am all face.' The Italians report (as far as I remember) of
the Duke of Florence his fool, who when his Lord asked him how, being
so ill-clad, he could endure the cold, which he hardly was able to doe
himselfe; to whom the foole replied: 'Master, use but my receipt and
put all the cloaths you have upon you, as I doe all mine; you shall
feele no more cold than I doe.' King Massinissa, even in his eldest
daies, were it never so cold, so frosty, so stormie, or sharpe wether,
could never be induced to put something on his head, but went alwaies
bareheaded. The like is reported of the Emperor Severus.  In the
battles that past betweene the Egyptlans and the Persians, Herodotus
saith, that both himselfe and divers others tooke speciall notice that
of such as lay slaine on the ground the Egyptians sculs were without
comparison much harder than the Persians: by reason that these go ever
with their heads covered with coifs and turbants, and those from their
infancie ever shaven and bare-headed.  And King Agesilaus, even in his
decrepit age, was ever wont to weare his cloaths both Winter and
Summer alike.  Suetomus affirmeth that Caesar did ever march foremost
before his troupes, and most commonly bare-headed, and on foot,
whether the sunne shone or it rained.  The like is reported of
Hanniball,

         ----- tum vertice nudo

  Excipere insanos imbres, caelique ruinam./1


  Bare-headed then he did endure,

  Heav'ns ruine and mad-raging showre.

A Venetian that hath long dwelt amongst them, and who is but lately
returned thence, writeth, that in the Kingdome of Pegu, both men and
women, leaving all other parts clad, goe ever bare-footed, yea, and on
horsebacke also. And Plato for the better health and preservation of
the body doth earnestly perswade that no man should ever give the feet
and the head other cover than Nature hath allotted them.  He whom the
Polonians chuse for their King, next to ours who may worthily be
esteemed one of the greatest Princes of our age, doth never weare
gloves, nor what wether soover it be, winter or summer, other bonnet
abroad than in the warme house.  As I cannot endure to goe unbuttoned
or untrussed, so the husband-men neighbouring about me would be and
feele themselves as fettered or hand-bound with going so. Varro is of
opinion, that when we were appointed to stand bare headed before the
gods or in presence of the Magistrates, it was rather done for our
health, and to enure and arme us against injuries of the wether, than
in respect of reverence.

----- 1 SYL.  ITAL. 250.

And since we are speaking of cold, and are French-men, accustomed so
strangely to array our selves in party-coloured sutes (not I, because
I seldome weare any other than blacke or white, in imitation of my
father), let us adde this one thing more, which Captaine Martyn du
Bellay relateth in the voyage of Luxemburg, where he saith to have
seene so hard frosts, that their munition-wines were faine to be cut
and broken with hatchets and wedges, and shared unto the souldiers by
weight, which they carried away in baskets; and Ovid,

  Nudaque consistunt formam servantia testa

  Vina, nec hausta meri sed data frusta bibunt./1


  Bare wines, still keeping forme of caske stand fast

  Not gulps, but gobbets of their wine they taste.

The frosts are so hard and sharpe in the emboguing of the Meotis
fennes, that in the very place where Mithridates Lieutenant had
delivered a battel to his enemies, on hard ground and drie-footed, and
there defeated them, the next summer he there obtained another
sea-battel wgainst them.  The Romanes suffered a great disadvantage in
the fight they had with the Carthaginians neere unto Placentia, for so
much as they went to their charge with their blood congealed and
limbes benummed, through extreme cold: whereas Hanniball had caused
many fires to be made throughout his campe, to warme his souldiers by,
and a quantitie of oile to be distributed amongst them, that therewith
annointing themselves, they might make their sinewes more supple and
nimble, and harden their pores against the bitter blasts of cold wind
which then blew, and nipping piercing of the ayre.  The Grecians
retreat from Babilon into their countrie is renowned by reason of the
many difficulties and encombrances they encountred withall, and were
to surmount: whereof this was one, that in the mountaines of Armenia,
being surprised and encircled with so horrible and great quantitie of
snow, that they lost both the knowledge of the countrie and the wayes:
wherewith they were so straitly

----- 1 OVID.  Trist. 1. iii.  El. x. 23.

beset that they continued a day and a night without eating or
drinking; and most of their horses and cattell died; of their men a
great number also deceased; many with the glittering and whitenesse of
the snow were stricken blinde; divers through the extremitie were
lamed, and their limbes shrunken up; many starke stiffe and frozen
with colde, although their senses were yet whole.  Alexander saw a
nation where in winter they burie their fruit- bearing trees under the
ground, to defend them from the frost: a thing also used amongst some
of our neighbours.  Touching the subject of apparell, the King of
Mexico, was wont to change and shift his clothes foure times a day,
and never wore them againe' employing his leavings and cast-sutes for
his continuall liberalities and rewards; as also neither pot nor dish,
nor any implement of his kitchen or table were twice brought before
him.

CHAPTER 1.XXXVI+ OF CATO+ THE YOUNGER

I AM not possessed with this common errour, to judge of others
according to what I am my selfe.  I am easie to beleeve things
differing from my selfe. Though I be engaged to one forme, I doe not
tie the world unto it, as every man doth?  And I beleeve and conceive
a thousand manners of life, contrarie to the common sort: I more
easily admit and receive difference than resemblance in us.  I
discharge as much as a man will, another being of my conditions and
principles, and simply consider of it in my selfe without relation,
framing it upon its owne modell.  Though my selfe be not continent,
yet doe I sincerely commend and allow the continencie of the Capuchins
and Theatines, and highly praise their course of life.  I doe by
imagination insinuate my selfe into their place: and by how much more
they bee other than my selfe, so much the more doe I love and honour
him.  I would gladly have every man judged apart, and not be drawne my
selfe in consequence of others examples.  My weaknesse doth no way
alter the opinions I should have of the force and vigor of those that
deserve it.  Sunt, qui nihil suadent, quam quod se imitari posse
confidunt: 'There be such as advise to nothing but what they trust
themselves can imitate.' Crawling on the face of the earthe I cease
not to marke, even into the clouds, in the imitable height of some
heroicke minds.  It is much for me to have a formall and prescript
judgement, if the effects bee not so, and at least to maintaine the
chiefe part exempted from corruption.  It is something

----- 1 CIC.  Orat. ad Br.

thing to have a good minde, when my forces faile me.  The age we live
in (at least our climate) is so dull and leaden, that not only the
execution, but the very imagination of vertue is farre to seeke, and
seemes to be no other thing than a College supposition and a gibrish
word.

         ----- virtutem verba putant, u

  Lucum ligna:/1


  Vertue seemes words to these

  As trees are wood, or woods are trees.

Quam vereri deberent, etiam si percipere non possent:/2 'Which yet
they should reverence, though they could not reach unto." {skeptic+?}
It is an eare-ring or pendant to hang in a cabinet, or at the tongues
end, as well as at an eare for an ornament.  There are no more
vertuous actions knowne; those that beare a shew of vertue have no
essence of it: for profit, glorie, custome, feare, {list_of_vices+}
and other like strange causes direct us to produce them.  Justice,
valour, integritie, which we then exercise, may by others
consideration, and by the countenance they publikly beare, be termed
so: but with the true workman it is no vertue at all.  There is
another end proposed; another efficient cause.  Vertue alloweth of
nothing but what is done by her, and for her alone.  In that great
battell at Potidaea which the Grecians under Pausanias gained of
Mardonius and the Persians, the victors following their custome,
comming to share the glorie and prise of the victorie betweene them,
ascribed the pre- excellencie of valor in that conflict to the
Spartane nation.  The Spartines, impartiall Judges of vertue.  When
they came to decide to what particular man of their countrie the
honour to have done best in that day should of right belong, they
found that Aristodemus had most couragiously engaged and hazarded
himselfe: Yet gave him not the prise of honour of it, because his
vertue had beene therunto incited by an earnest desire to purge
himselfe from the reproch

----- 1 HOR.  Epist. vi. 1. i. 31. 2 CIC.  Tusc.  Qu. v. 2.

and infamie which hee had incurred in the action at Thermopyles, and
from all daring ambition to die courageously, thereby to warrant his
former imputation.  Our judgements are yet sicke, and follow the
depravations of our customes.  I see the greatest part of our spirits
to affect wit, and to shew themselves ingenious, by obscuring and
detracting from the glorie of famous and generall ancient actions,
giving them some base and malicious interpetation, fondly and
enviously charging them with vaine causes and frivolous occasions.  A
subtill invention no doubt.  Let any man present me with the most
excellent and blameless action, and I will oppose it with fiftie
vicious and bad intentions, all which shall carrie a face of
likelihood. {deconstruction+} God knowes (to him that will extend
them) what diversitie of images our internal will doth suffer: They
doe not so maliciously as grosely and rudely endeavour to be ingenious
with all their railing and detraction.  The same paine a man taketh to
detract from these noble and famous names, and the verie same libertie
would I as willingly take to lend them my shoulders to extoll and
magnifie them.  I would endevour to charge these rare and choise
figures, selected by the consent of wise men for the worlds examples
as much and as high as my invention would give me leave with honour,
in a plausible interpretation and favourable circumstance. And a man
must thinke that the diligent labours of our invention are farre
beyond their merit.  It is the part of honest minded men to pourtray
vertue as faire as possible faire may be.  A thing which would no whit
be mis-seeming or undecent, if passion should transport us to the
favour and pursuit of so sacred formes, what these doe contrarie, they
either doe it through malice or knaverie, with purpose to reduce and
sute their beleefe to their capacitie whereof I lately spake; or
rather, as I thinke, because their sight is not of sufficient power or
clearnes, nor addressed to conceive or apprehend the farre-shining
brightnes of vertue in naturall and genuine puritie: as Plutarke
saith, that in his time some imputed the cause of Cato the youngers
death to the feare he had coneeived of Cesar: whereat he hath some
reason to be moved: by which a man may judge how much more he would
have beene offended with those that have ascribed the same unto
ambition.  Oh foolish people!  Hee would no doubt have performed a
faire action, so generous and so just, rather with ignominie than for
glorie.  This man was truly a patterne whom nature chose to shew how
farre humane vertue may reach, and mans constancie attaine unto.  But
my purpose is not here to treat this rich argument: I will only
confront together the sayings of five Latin Poets upon Catoes
commendations, and for the interest of Cato, and by incidencie for
theirs also.  Now ought a gentleman, well-bred, in respect of others,
finde the two former somewhat languishing; the third more vigorous,
but suppressed by the extravagancie of force.  He will judge there
were yet place for one or two degrees of invention, to reach unto the
fourth, in consideration of which he will through admiration joyne
hands for the last (yet first in some degree and space, but which
space he will sweare can by no humane spirit be filled up) he will be
much amazed, he will be much amated.  Loe, here are wonders, we have
more Poets than judges and interpreters of poesie.  It is an easier
matter to frame it than to know it: Being base and humble, it may be
judged by the precepts and art of it: But the good and loftie, the
supreme and divine, is beyond rules and above reason.  Whosoever
discerneth her beautie, with a constant, quicke-seeing, and setled
looke, he can no more see and comprehend the same than the splendor of
a lightning flash.  It hath no communitie with our judgement; but
ransacketh and ravisheth the same.  The furie which prickes and moves
him that can penetrate her, doth also stricke and wound a third man,
if he heare it either handled or recited, as the adamant stone drawes
not only a needle, but infuseth some of her facultie in the same to
draw others: And it is more apparently_ seene in theaters, that the
sacred inspiration of the Muses, having first stirred up the Poet with
a kinde of agitation unto choler, unto griefe, unto hatred, yea and
beyond himselfe, whither and howsoever they please, doth also by the
Poet strike and enter into the Actor, and consequently by the Actor a
whole auditorie or multitude.  It is the ligament of our senses
depending one of another.  Even from my infancie Poesie hath had the
vertue to transpierce and transport me.  But that lively and
feeling-movino that is naturally in me have diversly beene handled, by
the diversitie of forms, not so much higher or lower (for they were
ever the highest in every kind) as different in colour.  First a
blithe and ingenious fluiditie, then a quaint-wittie and loftie
conceit.  To conclude, a ripe and constant force.  Ovid, Lucan, and
Virgil will better declare it.  But here our Gallants are in their
full cariere.

  Sit Cato dum vivit sane vel Caesare major./1

  Let Cato Junior, while he doth live, greater than Caesar be.


Saith one.

         ----- et invictum devicta morte Catone:/2

  Cato unconquered, death being vanquished.


Saith another: And the third, speaking of the civill warres betweene
Caesar and Pompey

  Victrix causa Diis placuit, sed victa Catoni./3


  The cause that overcame with Gods was greate

  But the cause overcome pleased Cato better.

And the fourth upon Caesars commendations:

  Et cuncta terrarum subacta

  Praeter atrocem animum Catonis./4


  Of all the earth all parts enthralled

  Catoes minde only unappalled.

And the harps-master, after he hath installed the names of the
greatest Romans in his picture, ended thus:

         ----- -his dantem jura Catonem./5


  Chiefe justice Cato doe decrer

  Lawes that for righteous soules should be.

----- 1 MART. 1. vi.  Epig. xxxii. 5. 2 MANIL.  Astr. 1. iv. 87 3
LUCAN.  Bel. Civ. 1. i. 127. 4 HOR. 1. ii.  Od. i. 23. 5 Virg.
Aen. 1. viii. 6 70.

CHAPTER 1.XXXVII+ HOW WE WEEPE AND LAUGH AT ONE SELFE-SAME THING

WHEN we reade in Histories,/1 that Antigonus was highly displeased
with his sonne, at what time he presented unto him the head of King
Pirrhus his enemie, slaine but a little before in fight against him
which he no sooner saw but he burst foorth a weeping: And that Renate
Duke of Loraine wept for the death of Charles Duke of Burgundie, whom
hee had eftsoones discomfited, and was as an assistant mourner at his
funeralls: And that in the battel of Anroy (which the Earl of Montfort
had gained against the faction of Charles de BIois, for the Dutchi of
Britanie) the victorious conqueror met with the bodie of his enemie
deceased, mourned very grievously for him; a man must not suddenly
exclaime.

  E cosi avven che l'animo ciascuno

  Sua passion sotto 'l contrario mant

  Ricopre, con la vista hor' chiara, hor' bruna.


  So happens it, the minde covers each passion

  Under a cloake of colours opposite

  To fight now cleare, now darke, in divers fashion.

When Caesar was presented with Pompeis head, Histories report that he
turned his looks aside, as from a ghastly and unpleasing spectacle.
There hath beene so long a correspondence in societie in the managing
of public affairs, mutually betweene them, such a community of
fortunes, so many reciprocall offices and bonds of alliance, that a
man cannot thinke his

----- 1 PLUT.  Vit.  Pyrrh.

countenance to have beene forced, false, and wily, as this other
supposeth.

         ----- tutumque putavit

  Iam bonus esse socer, lacrymas non sponte cadente

  Effudit, gemitusque expressit pectore laeto./1


  Now to be kinde indeed he did not doub

  Father in law, teares, which came hardly ou

  He shed, and grones expres

  From inward pleased brest.

For certainly, howbeit the greatest number of our actions bee but
masked and painted over with dissimulation, and that it may sometimes
be true,

  Haeredis fletus sub persona risus est./2

The weeping of an heire is laughing under a visard or disguise.  Yet
     must a man consider, by judging of his accidents, how our mindes
     are often agitated by divers passions; For (as they say) there is
     a certaine assembly of divers humours in our bodies, whereof she
     is soveraigne mistris, who most ordinarily, according to our
     complexions, doth command us: so in our minde, although it
     containe severall motions that agitate the same, yet must one
     chiefly be predominant.  But it is not with so full an advantage,
     but for the volubilitie and supplenesse of our minde, the weakest
     may by occasion reobtaine the place againe, and when their turne
     cometh, make a now cbarge; whence we see not only children, who
     simply and naturally follow nature, often to weepe and laugh at
     one selfe- same thing, but none of us all can vaunt himselfe,
     what wished for or pleasant voyage soever he undertake, but that
     taking leave of his family and friends, {usthem+} he shall feele
     a chilling and panting of the heart, and if he shed not teares,
     at least he puts his foot in the stirrup with a sad and heavie
     cheere.  And what gentle flame soever doth warme the heart of
     young virgins, yet are they hardly drawne to leave and forgoe
     their mothers, to betake them to their husbands: whatsoever this
     good fellow say:

----- 1 LUCAN. 1. ix. 1040. 2 AUL.  GELL.  Noct.  Att. 1. xvii. c. 14.

  Est ne novis nuptis odio Venus, anne parentu

  Frustrantur falsis gaudia lacrymulis

  Vbertum thalami quas intra limina fundunt

  Non, ita me Divi, vera gemunt, juverint./1


  Doe young birds hate indeed fresh Venus toyes

  Or with false teares delude their parents joyes

  Which in their chambers they powre out amaine

  So helpe me God they doe not true complain.

So is it not strange to mourne for him dead, whom a man by no meanes
would have alive againe.  When I chide my boy, I doe it with the best
heart I have: They are true and not fained imprecations: but that fit
past over, let him have need of me, I will gladly, doe him all the
good I can and by and by I turne over another leafe.  If I chance to
call one knave or asse, my purpose is not for ever to enfeoffe him
with those nick-names; nor doe I think to say, tong thou liest, if
immediately after I call him an honest man.  No qualitie doth embrace
us purely and universally.  If it were not the countenance of a foole
to speake alone or to him selfe, there would scarce be day or houre
wherein some body should not heare me mutter and grumble to my selfe,
and against my selfe, A () in the fooles teeth! yet doe not I thinke
it to be my definition.  He that seeth me sometimes to cast a frowning
looke upon my wife, or sometimes a loving countenance, and thinkes
that either of them is but fained, he is a foole.  Nero taking leave
of his mother, whom hee sent to be drowned, felt notwithstanding the
emotion of that motherly farewell, and at one instant was strucken
with horror and pitie.  It is said that the Sunnes-light is not of one
continued piece, but that it so uncessantly and without intermission
doth cast so thicke new raies, one in the neeke of another, upon us,
that wee cannot perceive the space betweene them.

  Largus enim liquidi-fons luminis, aethereus sol

  Irrigat assidue caelum candore recenti

Suppeditaque novo confestim lumine lumen:/2

  Heav'ns Sunne the plenteous spring of liquid ligh

  Still heav'n bedewes with splendor fresh and bright

  Still light supplies with light of fresher sight.

----- 1 CATUL.  Eleg. ii. 15. 2 LUCR. 1. v. 281.

     So doth our minde cast her points diversly and impercepubly.
     Artabanus surprised Xerxes his nephew, and chid him for the
     sudden changing of his countenance.  He was to consider the
     unmeasurable greatnesse of his forces at the passage of
     Hellespont, for the enterprise of Greece.  First he was suddenly
     assailed by an excessive joy, to see so many thousands of men at
     his service, and witnessed the same by the alacritie and
     cheerefulnes of his countenance: And immediately at that verie
     moment, his thoughts suggesting how so many lives were to be
     consumed, and should come to nothing (at the furthest, within one
     age), he gan to frowne his browes, and grew so pensive that he
     wept.  We have with a resolute and inexorable minde pursued the
     revenge+ of an injurie, and felt a singular content for the
     victorie; yet upon better advice doe we weepe: it is not that we
     weepe for: the thing is as it was, there is nothing changed: But
     that our minde beholds the thing with another eie, and under
     another shape, it presents it self unto us.  For every thing hath
     divers faces, sundry byases, and severall lustres.  Aliance,
     kinred, old acquaintances, and long friendship seize on our
     imagination, and at that instant passionate the same according to
     their qualitie, but the turne or change of it is so violent that
     it escapes us.

  Nil adeo fieri celeri ratione videtur

  Quam si mens fieri proponit et inchoat ipsa

  Ocius ergo animus quam res se perciet ulla

  Ante quarum in promptu natura videtur./1


  Nothing in so quicke sort seemes to be done

  As minde set on a thing, and once begun

  The minde that swifter stirres before our eies

  Than any thing, whose forme we soone comprize.

And therefore, intending to continue one body of all this pursuit, we
deceive our selves.  When Timoleon weepeth the murther he hath
perpetrated with so mature and generous a determmation, he weepeth not
for the libertie restored to his countrie, nor the tyrant, but he
weepeth for his brother. One part of his dutie is acted, let us permit
him to play the other.

----- 1 LUCR. 1. iii. 183.

CHAPTER 1.XXXVIII+ OF SOLITARINESSE

LET us leave apart this outworne comparison, betweene a solitarie and
an active_life+: And touching that goodly saying under which ambition
and avance shroud themselves, that we are not borne for our
particular, but for the publike_good+ let us boldly refer ourselves to
those that are engaged and let them beat their conscience, if on the
contrarie the states, the charges, and this trash of the world are not
rather sought and sued for to draw a private commoditie from the
publike.  The bad and indirect meanes wherethrough in our age men
canvase and toyle to attaine the same, doe manifestly declare the end
thereof to be of no great consequence.  Let us answer ambition+, that
herselfe gives us the taste of solitarinesse.  For what doth she shun
so much as company?  What seeketh shee more than elbow- roome?  There
is no place but there are meanes and waies to doe well or ill.
Neverthelesse if the saying of Bias be true, 'That the worst part is
the greatest:' Or that which Ecclesiastes saith, 'That of a thousand
there is not one good:'

  Rari quippe boni: numero vix sunt totidem, quot Thebarum portae, vel
  divitis ostia Nili:/1


  Good men are rare, so many scarce (I feare

  As gates of Thebes, mouths of rich Nilus were:

Contagion is very dangerous in a throng.  A man must imitate the
vicious or hate them: both are dangerous: for to resemble them is
perilous, because

----- 1 JUV.  Sat. xiii. 26.

they are many, and to hate many is hazardous, because they are
dissemblable, and Merchants that travell by sea have reason to take
heed that those which goe in the same ship be not dissolute,
blasphemers, and wicked, judging such company unfortunate.  Therefore
Bias said pleasantly to those that together with him passt the danger
of a great storme, and called to the Gods for helpe: 'Peace, my
masters, lest they should heare that you are here with me.' And of a
more militarie example, Albuqerque, Viceroy in India for Emanuel King
of Portugall, in an extreme danger of a sea-tempest, tooke a young boy
upon his shoulders, for this only end, that in the common perill his
innocence might be his warrant and recommending to Gods favour to set
him on shore: yet may a wise man live every where contented, yea and
alone, in the throng of a Pallace: but if he may chuse, he will (saith
he) avoid the sight of it.  If need require, he will endure the first:
but if he may have his choice, he will chuse the latter.  He thinks he
hath not sufficiently rid himselfe from vices if he must also contest
with other mens faults.  Charondas punished those for wicked that were
convicted to have frequented lewd companies.  There is nothing so dis-
sociable and sociable as man, the one for his vice, the other for his
nature.  And I think Antisthenes did not satisfie him that upbraided
him with his conversation with the wicked, saying, 'That Physicians
live amongst the sicke:' Who if they stead sicke-mens healths, they
impaire their owne by the infection, continuall visiting, touching,
and frequenting of diseases.  Now (as I suppose) the end is both one,
thereby to live more at leasure and better at ease.  But man doth not
alwaies seeke the best way to come unto it, who often supposeth to
have quit affaires when he hath but changed them.  There is not much
lesse vexation in the government of a private family than in the
managing of an entire state: wheresoever the minde is busied, there it
is all.  And though domesticall occupations be lesse important, they
are as importunate. Moreover, though we have freed ourselves from the
court and from the market, we are not free from the principall
torments of our life. {Emerson+}

         ----- ratio et prudentia curas

  Non locus effusi late maris arbiter aufert./1


  Reason and wisdome may set cares aside.

  Not place the Arbiter of seas so wide.

Shift we or change we places never so often, ambition, avarice,
irresolution, feare, and concupiscences never leave us.

  Et post equitem sedet atra cura./2


  Care, looking grim and blacke, doth sit

  Behind his backe that rides from it.

They often follow us, even into immured cloisters. and into schooles
of philosophy; nor doe hollow rocks, nor wearing of haire-shirts, nor
continuall fastings, rid us from them.

  Haeret lateri lethalis arundo.3


  The shaft that death implide

  Sticks by the flying side.

It was told Socrates that one was no whit amended by his travell: 'I
believe it wel (said he) for he carried himselfe with him.' {Emerson+}

  Quid terras alio calente

  Sole mutamus? patria quis exul

  Se quoque fugit? /4


  Why change we soyles warm'd with another Sunne?

  Who from home banisht hath himselfe outrunne?

If a man doe not first discharge both himselfe and his minde from the
burthen that presseth her, removing from place to place will stirre
and presse her the more, I as in a ship, wares well stowed and closely
piled take up least roome, you doe a sicke-man more hurt than good to
make him change place, you settle an evill in removing the same; as
stakes or poles, the more they are stirred and shaken, the faster they
sticke, and

----- 1 HOR. 1. i.  Epist. xi. 25. 2 HOR 1. iii.  Od. i. 39. 3 VIRG.
AEn. 1. iv. 73. 4 HOR. 1. ii.  Od. xvi. 18.

sinke deeper into the ground.  Therefore is it not enough for a man to
have sequestered himselfe from the concourse of people: is it not
sufficient to shift place, a man must also sever himselfe from the
popular conditions that are in us.  A man must sequester and recover
himselfe from himselfe.

         ----- rupi jam vincula, dicas

  Nam luctata canis nodum arripit, attamen illa

  Cum fugit, a collo trahitur pars longa catenae./1


  You will say haply I my bonds have quit

  Why so the striving dog the knot hath bit

  Yet when he flies, much ohaine doth follow it.

We carry our fetters with us: is it not all absolute libertie; we
still cast backe our lookes towards that we have left behinde: our
minde doth still run on it; our fancie is full of it.

         ----- nisi purgatum est pectus, quaem praelia nobi

  Atque pericula tunc ingratis insinuandum?

  Quantae conscindunt hominem cupidinis actes

  Solicitum curae, quantique perinde timores

  Quidve superbia, spurcidia ac petulantia, quantas

  Efficiunt clades, quid luxus, desidiesque?/2


  Unlesse our breast be purg'd, what warres must wee

  What perils then, though much displeased, see?

  How great teares, how great cares of sharpe desire

  Doe carefull man distract, torment, enfire

  Uncleannesse, wantonnesse, sloth, riot, pride

  How great calamities have these implide?

Our evill is rooted in our minde: and it cannot scape from it selfe.

  In culpa est animus, qui se non effugit unquam,/3


  The minde in greatest fault must li

  Which from itselfe can never flie,

Therefore must it be reduced and brought into it selfe: It is the true
solitarinesse, and which may be enjoyed even in the frequencie of
peopled Cities and Kings courts; but it is more commodiously enjoyed

----- 1 PERS.  Sat. v. 138. 2 LUCR. 1. v. 44. 3 HOR. 1. i.
Epist. xiv. 13.

apart.  Now sithence wee undertake to live solitarie, and without
companie, let IIS cause our contentment to depend of our selves: Let
us shake off all bonds that tie us unto others: Gaine we that victorie
over us, that in good earnest we may live solitarie, and therein live
at our ease.  Stilpon having escaped the combustion of his Citie,
wherein he had lost both wife and children, and all his goods;
Demetrius Poliorcetes seeing him in so great a ruine of his Countrie
with an unaffrighted countenance, demanded of him, whether he had
received any losse: He answered, No: and that (thanks given to God) he
had lost nothing of his owne.  It is that which Antisthenes the
Philosopher said very pleasantly, 'That man ought to provide himselfe
with munitions that might float upon the water, and by swimming escape
the danger of shipwracke with him.' Verily, 'a man of understanding
hath lost nothing if he yet have himselfe.' When the Citie of Nola was
over-run by the Barbarians, Paulinus, bishop thereof, having lost all
he had there, and being their prisoner, prayed thus unto God: 'O Lord,
deliver me from feeling of this losse: for thou knowest as yet they
have toucht nothing that is mine.' The riches that made him rich, and
the goods which made him good, were yet absolutely whole.  Behold what
it is to chuse treasures well, that may be freed from injurie; and to
hide them in a place where no man may enter, and which cannot be
betraied but by our selves.  A man that is able may have wives,
children, goods, and chiefly health, but not so tie himselfe unto them
that his elicitie depend on them.  We should reserve a store-house for
our selves, what need soever change; altogether ours, and wholly free,
wherein we may hoard up and establish our true libertie, and
principall retreit and solitarinesse, wherein we must go alone to our
selves, take out ordinarie entertainment, and so privateIy that no
acquaintance or communication of any strange thing may therein find
place: there to discourse, to meditate and laugh, as, without wife,
without children, and goods, without traine or servants; that if by
any occasion they be lost, it seeme not strange to us to passe it
over; we have a minde moving and turning in it selfe; it may keep it
selfe companie; it hath wherewith to offend and defend, wherewith to
receive, and wherewith to give.  Let us not feare that we shall faint
and droop through tedious and mind-trying idlenesse in this
solitarinesse.

  In solis sis tibi turba locis.


  Be thou, when with thee is not any

  As good unto thy selfe as many.

Vertue is contented with it selfe, without discipline, without words,
and without effects.  In our accustomed actions, of a thousand there
is not one found that regards us: he whom thou seest so furiously, and
as it were besides himselfe, to clamber or drawle up the citie wals or
breach, as a point-blank to a whole voly of shot, and another all
wounded and skarred, crazed and faint, and wel-nie hunger-starven,
resolved rather to die than to open his enemie the gate and give him
entrance; doest thou think he is there for himselfe?  No verily.  It
is peradventure for such a one whom neither he nor so many of his
fellowes ever saw, and who haply takes no care at all for them; but is
therewhilst wallowing up to the ears in sensualitie, slouth, and all
manner of carnal delights.  This man, whom about mid-night, when
others take their rest, thou seest come out of his study, meagre
looking, with eyes trilling, flegmatick, squalide, and spauling, doest
thou thinke that plodding on his books doth seek how he shall become
an honester man, or more wise, or more content?  There is no such
matter.  He wil either die in his pursuit, or teach posteritie the
measure of Plautus verses and the true orthography of a Latine word.
Who doth not willingly chop and counterchange his health, his ease,
yea and his life, for glorie and for reputation? The most
unprofitable, vaine, and counterfet coine, that is in use with us.
Our death is not sufficient to make us afraid; let us also charge
ourselves with that of our wives, of our children, and of our friends
and people. Our owne affaires doe not sufficiently trouble and vexe
us: Let us also drudge, toile, vex, and torment ourselves with our
neighbours and friends matters.

  Vah quemquamne hominem in animum instituere, au

  Parare, quod sit charius, quam ipse est sibi?/1


  Fie, that a man should cast, that ought, than h

  Himselfe of himselfe more belov'd should be.

Solitarinesse, mee seemeth, hath more apparence and reason in those
which have given their most active and flourishing age into the world,
in imitation of of Thales.  We have lived long enough for others, live
we the remainder of our life unto our selves: let us bring home our
cogitations and inventions unto our selves and unto our ease.  It is
no easie matter to make a safe retreit: it doth over-much trouble us
with joyning other enterprises unto it; since God gives us leasure to
dispose of our dislodging.  Let us prepare ourselves unto it, packe
wee up our baggage.  Let us betimes bid our companie farewell.  Shake
we off these violent holdfasts which else-where engage us, and
estrange us from our selves.  These so strong bonds must be untied,
and a man must eft-soones love this or that, but wed nothing but
himselfe; That is to say, let the rest be our owne: yet not so
combined and glued together that it may not be sundred without fleaing
us, and therewithall pull away some peece of our owne.  The greatest
thing of the world is for a man to know how to be his owne.  It is
high time to shake off societie, since we can bring nothing to
it.{Thoreau+} And he that cannot lend, let him take heed of borrowing.
Our forces faile us: retire we them, and shut them up into our selves.
He that can suppresse and confound in himselfe the offices of so many
amities, and of the company, let him doe it.  In this fall which makes
us inutile, irkesome, and importunate to others, let him take heed he
be not importunate, irkesome, and unprofitable to himselfe.  Let him
flatter court, and cherish himselfe, and above all let him governe him

----- 1 TER.  Adel. act. i. sc. 1. 13.

selfe, respecting his reason and fearing his conscience, so that he
may not without shame stumble or trip in their presence.  Rarum est
enim, ut satis se quisque vereatur: 'For it is a rare matter that
every man sufficiently should stand in awe and reverence of himselfe.'
Socrates saith, 'That young men ought to be instructed, and men
exercised in well doing; and old men withdraw themselves from all
civill and military negotiations, living at their owne discretion,
without obligation to any certaine office.' There are some complexions
more proper for these precepts of retreit than orhers. Those which
have a tender and demisse apprehension, a squemish affection, a
delicate will, and which cannoi easily subject or imploy it selfe (of
which both by naturall condition and propense discourse I am one) wil
better apply themselves unto this counsell than active minds and busie
spirits; which imbrace all, ever where engage, and in all things
passionate themselves, that offer, that present and yeeld themselves
to all occasions.  A man must make use of all these accidentall
commodities, and which are without us, so long as they be pleasing to
us; but not make them our principall foundation: It is not so; nor
reason, nor nature permit it.  Why should we against their lawes
subject our contentment to the power of others?  Moreover, to
anticipate the accidents of fortune+, for a man to deprive himselfe of
the commodities he hath in possession, as many have done for devotion,
and some Philosophers by discourse; to serve themselves, to lie upon
the hard ground, to pull out their own eyes, to cast their riches into
the sea, to seeke for paine and smart (some by tormenting this life
for the happinesse of another; othersome placing themselves on the
lowest step, thereby to warrant themselves from a new fall) is the
action of an excessive vertue.  Let sterner and more vigorous
complexions make their lurking glorious and exemplar.

         ----- tuta et parvula laudo

  Cum res deficiunt, satis inter vilia fortis

  Verum ubi quid melius contingit et unctius, idem

  Hos sapere, et solos aio bene vivere, quoru

  Conspicitur nitidis fundata pecunia villis./1


  When riches faile, I praise the safe estate

  Though small; base things do not high thoughts abate

  But when tis better, finer with me,

  They only live well, and are wise, doe crie

  Whose corne in faire farmes doth well-grounded lie.

There is worke enough for me to doe without going so far.  It
sufficeth me, under fortunes favour, to prepare my selfe for her
disfavour; and being at ease, as far as imagination may attaine unto,
so represent the evill to come unto my selfe: Even as we enure our
selves to Tilts and Tourneyes, and counterfeit warre in time of peace.
I esteeme not Arcesilaus the Philosopher lesse reformed because I know
him to have used household implements of gold and silver, according as
the condition of his fortune gave him leave. I rather value him the
more than if he had not done it, forsomuch as he both moderately and
liberally made use of them.  I know unto what limits naturall
necessitie goeth; and I consider a poore almesman begging at my doore
to be often more plump-cheekt, in better health and liking, than I am:
Then doe I enter into his estate, and essay to frame and sute my mind
unto his byase.  And so over-running other examples, albeit I imagine
death, povertie, contempt, and sicknesse to be at my heeles, I easily
resolve my selfe not to apprehend any feare of that which one of lesse
worth than my selfe doth tolerate and undergoe with such patience: And
I cannot beleeve thai the basenesse or shallownesse of understanding
can doe more than vigor and far-seeing, or that the effects and reason
of discretion+ cannot reach to the effects of custome and use.  And
knowing what slender hold-fast these accessorie commodities have, I
omit not in full jovyssance of them, humbly to beseech God of his
mercie (as a soveraigne request) to make me contented with my selfe,
and with the goods proceeding from me.  I see some gallantly-disposed
young men,

----- 1 HOR.  I. i.  Epist. xv. 42.

who notwithstanding their faire-seeming shew, have boxes full of pils
in their coffers at home, to take when the rhume shall assaile them;
which so much the lesse the feare, when they thinke the remedy to be
at hand. So must a man doe: as also if he feele himselfe subject to
some greater infirmitie, to store himselfe with medicaments that may
asswage, supple, and stupifie the part grieved.  The occupation a man
should chuse for such a life must neither be painfull nor tedious,
otherwise in vaine should we accompt to have sought our abiding there,
which depends from the particular taste of every man.  Mine doth no
way accommodate itselfe to husbandrie. Those that love it, must with
moderation apply themselves unto it.

  Conentur sibi res, non se submittere rebus./1


  Endevour they things to them to submit

  Not them to things (if they have Horace wit)

Husbandrie is otherwise a servile office, as Salust termeth it: It
hath more excusable parts, as the care of gardening, which Xenophon
ascribeth to Cyrus: A meane or mediocritie may be found betweene this
base and vile carking care, extended and full of toiling labor, which
we see in men that wholly plunge themselves therein, and that profound
and extreme retchlesnesse to let all things goe at six and seven,
which is seen in others.

         ----- Democriti pecus edit agello

  Cultague, dum peregre est animus sine corpore velox./2


  Cattle destroyd Democritus his sets

  While his mind bodilesse vagaries fets.

But let us heare the counsell which Plinie the younger giveth to his
friend Cornelius Rufus, touching this point of Solitarinesse: 'I
perswade thee in this full-gorged and fat retreit wherein thou art, to
remit this base and abject care of husbandrie unto thy servants, and
give thy selfe to the study of letters, whence thou maist gather
something that may altogether be thine

----- 1 HOR.  Epist. i. 19. 2 Ib.  Epist. xii. 12.

owne.' He meaneth reputation+: like unto Ciceroes humor, who saith,
That he will imploy his solitarmesse and residence from publike
affaires to purchase unto himselfe by his writings an immortall life.

         ----- usque adeon

  Scire tuum nihil est, nisi te scire hoc sciat atter


  Is it then nothing worth that thou doest know.

  Unlesse what thou doest know, thou others show?

It seemth to be reason, when a man speaketh to withdraw himselfe from
the world, that one should looke beyond him.  These doe it but by
halfes.  Indeed they set their match against the time they shall be no
more; but pretend to reap the fruit of their dessignes, when they
shall be absent from the world, by a ridiculous contradiction.  The
imagination of those who through devotion seeke solitarinesse, filling
their minds with the certaintie of heavenly promises, in the other
life, is much more soundly consorted.  They propose God as an object
infinit in goodnesse and incomprehensible in power, unto themselves.
The soule hath therein, in all free libertie, wherewith to glut her
selfe.  Afflictions and sorrowes redound to their profit, being
imployed for the purchase and attaining of health and eternall
gladnesse. Death, according to ones wish, is a passage to so perfect
an estate.  The sharpnesse of their rules is presently made smooth and
easie by custome; and carnall concupiscences rejected, abated, and
lulled asleep by refusing them: for nothing entertaineth them but use
and exercise.  This only end of another life, blessedly immortall,
doth rightly merit we should abandon the pleasures and commodities of
this our life.  And he that can enlighten his soule with the flame of
a lively faith and hope, really and constantly, in his solitarinesse
doth build unto himselfe a voluptuous and delicious life, far
surmounting all other lives.  Therefore doth neither the end nor
middle of this counsell please me.  We are ever falling into a relaps
from an ague to a burning fever.  This plodding occupation of

----- 1 PERS.  Sat. i. 27.

bookes is as painfull as any other, and as great an enemie unto
health, which ought principally to be considered.  And a man should
not suffer himselfe to be inveagled by the pleasure he takes in them:
It is the same pleasure that loseth the thriving husband-man, the
greedy-covetous, the sinning-voluptuous, and the puft-up ambitious.
The wisest men teach us sufficiently to beware and shield us from the
treasons of ourappetites+, and to discerne true and perfect pleasures
from delights blended and entermingled with more paine.  For most
pleasures (say they) tickle, fawne upon, and embrace us, with purpose
to strangle us, as did the theeves whom the Egyptians termed
Philistas: And if the head-ach would seize upon us before
drunkennesse, we would then beware of too much drinking: but
sensualitie, the better to entrap us, marcheth before, and hideth her
tracke from us.  Bookes are delightfull, but if by continuall
frequenting them, we in the end lose both health and cheerefulnesse
(our best parts) let us leave them.  I am one of those who thinke
their fruit can no way countervaile this losse. As men that have long
time felt themselves enfeebled through some indisposition, doe in the
end yeeld to the mercie of Physicke, and by art have certaine rules of
life prescribed them, which they will not transgresse: So he that
with-drawes himselfe, as digested and over-tired with the common life,
ought likewise to frame and prescribe this unto the rules of reason;
direct and range the same by premeditation and discourse.  He must bid
all manner of travell farewell, what shew soever it beare; and in
generall shun all passions that any way empeach the tranquillitie of
mind and body, and follow the course best agreeing with his humour.

  Vnusquisque sua noverit ire via./1


  His owne way every ma

  Tread-out directly can.

A man must give to thriving husbandrie, to laborious study, to
toilesome hunting, and to every other

----- 1 PROPERT. 1. ii.  El. xxv. 38.

exercise, the utmost bounds of pleasure; and beware he engage himselfe
no further, if once paine begin to intermeddle it selfe with her; we
should reserve businesse+ and negotiations only for so much as is
behoovefull to keepe us in breath, and to warrant us from the
inconveniences which the other extremitie of a base, faint-harted
idlenesse drawes after it. There are certaine barren and thornie
sciences, which for the most part are forged for the multitude: they
should be left for those who are for the service of the world.  As for
my selfe, I love no books but such as are pleasant and easie, and
which tickle me, or such as comfort and counsell me, to direct my life
and death+.

    ----- tacitum sylvas inter reptare salubre

Curantem quidquid dignum sapiente bonoque est./1

  Silently creeping midst the wholesome wood

  With care what's for a wise man and a good.

The wiser sort of men, having a strong and vigorous mind, may frame
unto themselves an altogether spirituall life.  But mine being common,
I must help to uphold my selfe by corporall commodities: And age
having eftsoones dispoiled me of those that were most mutable to my
fantasia, I instruct and sharpen my appetite to those remaining most
sortable this other season. We must tooth and naile retaine the use of
this lives pleasures, which our yeares snatch from us one after
another:

  Carpamus dulcia, nostrum est

  Quod vivis: cinis et manes et fabula fies./2


  Plucke we sweet pleasures: we thy life give thee

  Thou shalt a tale {Macbeth+}, a ghost, and ashes be.

Now concerning the end of glorie+, which Plinie and Cicero propose
unto us, it is far from my discourse: The most opposite humour to
solitarie retiring is ambition. 'Glorie and rest are things that
cannot squat in one same forme:' as far as I see, these have nought
but their armes and legs out of the throng, their mind 1 HOR. 1. i.
Epist. iv. 2 PERS.  Sat. v. 155.  and intent is further and more
engaged in them than ever it was.

  Tun', vetule, auriculis alienis colligis escas?/1


  Gatherst thou dotard at these yeares

  Fresh baits, fine food, for others eares?

They have gone backe that they might leap the better, and with a
stronger motion make a nimbler offer amidst the multitude.  Will you
see how they shoot-short by a cornes breadth? let us but counterpoise
the advice of two Philosophers, and of two most different sects: The
one writing to Idomeneus, the other to Lucilius, their friends, to
divert them from the managing of affaires and greatnesse unto a
solitarie kind of life. 'You have,' say they, 'lived hitherto swimming
and floating adrift, come and die in the haven; you have given the
past of your life unto light, give the remainder unto darknesse.' It
is impossible to give over occupations if you doe not also give over
the fruits of them: Therefore cleare your selfe from all care and
glorie.  There is great danger lest the glittering of your forepassed
actions should over much dazle you, yea, and follow you even to your
den. Together with other concupiscences, shake off that which commeth
from the approbation of others.  And touching your knowledge and
sufficiencie, take you no care of them, they will lose no whit of
their effect; if your selfe be anything the better for them.  Remember
but him, who being demanded to what purpose he toyled so much about an
art, which could by no meanes come to the knowledge of many: 'Few are
enow for me; one will suffice, yea, lesse than one will content me,'
answered he.  He said true: you and another are a sufficient theatre
one for another; or you to your selfe alone.  Let the people be one
unto you, and one be all the people to you: it is a base ambition to
goe about to draw glorie from ones idlenesse and from ones lurking
hole.  A man must doe as some wilde beasts, which at the entrance of
their caves will have no

----- 1 PERS.  Sat. i. 22.

manner of footing seene.  You must no longer seeke what the world
saith of you, but how you must speake unto your selfe: withdraw your
selfe into your selfe; but first prepare your selfe to receive your
selfe: it were folly to trust to your selfe if you cannot governe your
selfe.  A man may as well faile in solitariness as in companie, there
are waies for it, untill such time as you have framed your selfe, such
that you dare not halt before your selfe, and that you shall be
ashamed of and beare a kind of respect unto your selfe, Obversentur
species honestae animo:/1 'Let honest Ideaes still represent
themselves before your mind:'/2 Ever present Cato+, Phocion+, and
Aristides+ unto your imagination in whose presence even fooles would
hide their faults, and establish them as controulers of all your
intentions. If they be disordered and untuned, their reverence will
order and tune them againe: they will containe you in a way to be
contented with your selfe; to borrow nothing but from your selfe, to
settle and stay your mind in assured and limited cogitations, wherein
it may best please it selfe, and having gotten knowledge of true
felicities, which according to the measure a man understands them, he
shall accordingly injoy, and with them rest satisfied, without wishing
a further continuance either of life or name.  Loe heere the counsell
of truly-pure and purely- true philosophie not of a vaine-glorious,
boasting, and prating philosophie, as is that of the two first.

----- 1 CIC.  Tusc.  Qu. 1. ii. 2 SEN.  Epist. xi.


CHAPTER 1.XXXIX+ A CONSIDERATION UPON CICERO+

ONE word more in comparison of these two: There are gathered out of
Ciceroes writings and from Plimes (in mine opinion little agreeing
with his unckle) infinite testimonies of a nature beyond measure
ambitious. Amongst others, that they openly solicit the Historians of
their times not to forget them in their writings: and fortune, as it
were in spight, hath made the vanitie of their request to continue
even to our daies, and long since the histories were lost.  But this
exceedeth all hearts-basenesse in persons of that stampe, to have gone
about to draw some principall glorie from prating and speaking, even
to imploy their private Epistles written to their friends; in such
sort, as some missing the opportunitie to be sent, they
notwithstanding cause them to be published, with this worthy excuse,
that they would not lose their travell and lucubrations.  Is it not a
seemly thing in two Romane Consuls, chiefs magistrate

s of the common- wealth, Empresse of the world, to spend their time in
wittily devising and closely hudling up of a quaint missive or wittie
epistle, thereby to attaine the reputation that they perfectly
understand their mother tongue?  What could a seely Schoolmaster, who
gets his living by such trash, do worse?  If the acts of Xenophon, or
Caesar, had not by much exceeded their eloquence, I cannot beleeve
they would ever have written them. {acts_words+} They have endevored
to recommend unto posterity, not their sayings, but their doings.  And
if the perfection of well-speaking might bring any glorie sutable unto
a great personage,Scipio+ and Lelius+ would never have resigned the
honour of their comedies, and the elegancies and smooth-sportfull
conceits of the Latine tongue, unto an African servant: For, to prove
this labour to be theirs, the exquisit eloquence and excellent
invention thereof doth sufficiently declare it: and Terence himselfe
doth avouch it: And I could hardly be removed from this opinion.  It
is a kind of mockerie and injurie to raise a man to worth by qualities
mis-seeming his place and unfitting his calling, although for some
other respects praise-worthy; and also by qualities that ought not to
be his principall object.  As he that would commend aKing to be a
cunning painter, or a skilfull architect, or an excllent Harquibuzier,
or a never-missing-missing runner at the Ring.  These commendations
acquire a man no honour if they be not presented altogether with those
that are proper and convenient unto him, that is to say, justice, and
the skill to governe, and knowledge to direct his people both in peace
and warre.  In this sort doth Agrculture honour Cyrus, and Eloquence
Charlemaine, together with his knowledge in good
letters. {artscrafts+} I have in my time seene some who by writing did
earnestly get both their titles and living, to disavow their
aprentissage, mar their pen, and affect the ignorance of so vulgar a
qualitie; and which our people holds to be seldome found amongst wise
men, endeavouring to commend for better qualities.  Demosthenes his
companions in their ambassage to Philip, praised their Prince to be
faire, eloquent, and a good quaffer.  Demosthenes said, they were
commendations rather fitting a woman, an advocate, and a spunge, than
a King.

  Imperet bellante prior, jacente

  Lenis in hostem./1


  Better he rule, who mercifull will ru

  His foe subdued, than he that can subdue.

It is not his profession to know either how to hunt cunningly or to
dance nimbly.

----- 1 HOR.  Carm.  Secul. 57.

  Orabunt causas alii, caelique meatus

  Describent radio, et fulgentia sidera dicent;

  Hic regere imperio populos sciat./1


  Others shall causes plead, describe the skies'

  Motion by instrument, say how stars rise:

  But let him know to rule (just, valiant, wise).

Plutarke saith, moreover, That to appear so absolutely excellent in
these lesse-necessarie parts, is to produce a witnesse against
himselfe, to have ill spent his houres and fondly-bestowed his studye
which might better have been employed to more behoovefull and
profitable use.  So that Philip, King of Macedon, having heard great
Alexander, his sonne, sing at a feast and vie with the best musitians:
'Art thou not ashamed (said he unto him) to sing so well?' And to the
same Philip said a musitian, gainst whom he contended about his Art,
'God forbid, my Sovereigne, that ever so much hurt should befall you,
that you should understand these things better than my selfe.' A King
ought to be able to answer, as Iphicrates did the Orator who in his
invective urged him in this manner: 'And what art thou, thou shouldst
so brave it?  Art thou a man at Armes?  Art thou an Archer? Art thou a
Pikeman?' 'I am none of all those, but I am he who command all those.'
And Antisthenes made it as an argument of little value in Ismenias,
when some commended him to be an excellent Flutist.  Well I wot that
when I heare some give themselves to dwell on the phrase of my
Essayes, I would rather have them hold their peace: They doe not so
much raise the words as depresse the sense; so much the more sharply
by how much more obliquely. Yet am I deceived if some others take not
more hold on the matter; and how well or ill soever, if any writer
hath scattered the same, either more materiall, or at least thicker on
his paper: That I may collect the more, I doe but huddle it; the
arguments or chiefe heads.  Let me but adde what followes them, I
shall daily increase this volume.  And how many stories have I glanced
at therein, that

----- 1 VIRG.  AEn. 1. vi. 856.

speake not a word, which whosoever shall unfold may from them draw
     infinite Essayes?  Nor they, nor my allegations doe ever serve
     simply for examples, authoritie, or ornament.  I doe not only
     respect them for the use I draw from them.  They often (beyond my
     purpose) produce the seed of a richer subject and bolder matter,
     and often, collaterally, a more harmonious tune, both for me,
     that will expresse no more in this place, and for them that shall
     hit upon my tune.  But returning to virtue.  I find no great
     choice betweene him that can speake nothing but evill, and one
     that can talke nothing but to talke well.  Non est ornamentum
     virile concinnitas:/1 'Finenesse is no great grace for a man.'
     {PlainDealer+} Wise men say, that in respect of knowledge, there
     is nothing but philosophy, and in regard of effects, but Vertue:
     which is generally fit for all degrees and for all
     orders. Something there is alike in these two other philosophers;
     for they also promise eternitie to the Epistles they write to
     their friends.  But after another fashion, and to a good purpose,
     accommodating themselves to others vanitie: For they send them
     word, that if care to make themselves knowen unto future ages,
     and respect of renowne, doth yet retaine them in the managing of
     affaires, and makes them feare solitarmesse and a retired life,
     to which they would call them, that they take no more paines for
     it: for as much as they have sufficient credit with posteritie,
     by answering them; and were it but by the epistles they write
     unto them, they will make Their name as famous and as farre
     knowen, as all their publike actions might doe.  Besides this
     difference, they are not frivolous, idle, and triviall Epistles,
     and only compact and held together with exquisite choise words,
     hudled-up and ranged to a just smoothe cadence, but stufft and
     full of notable sayings and wise sentences; by which a man doth
     not only become more eloquent, but more wise, and that teach us
     not to say well, but to doe well.  Fie on that eloquence which
     leaves us with a desire of it,

----- 1 SEN.  Epist. xxv.

and not of things; unlesse a man will say that Ciceroes being so
exceedingly perfect doth frame it selfe a body of perfection.  I will
further alleage a storie, which to this purpose we reade of him, to
make us palpably feele his naturall condition.  He was to make an
Oration in publike, and being urged betimes to prepare himselfe for
it, Eros, one of his servants, came to tel him the Auditorio was
deferred till the morrow next; he was so glad of it, that for so good
newes he gave him his libertie.  Touching this subject of Epistles,
thus much I will say: It is a worke wherein my friends are of opinion
I can doe something; and should more willingly have undertaken to
publish my gifts had I had who to speake unto.  It had beene requisite
(as I have had other times) to have had a certaine commerce to draw me
on, to encourage me, and to uphold me.  For, to go about to catch the
winde in a net, as others doe, I cannot; and it is but a dreame.  I am
a sworne enemie to all falsifications. {PlainDealer+} I should have
beene more attentive and more assured, having a friendly and strong
direction, than to behold the divers images of a whole multitude: and
I am deceived if it be not better succeeded with me.  I have naturally
a comical and familiar stile: But after a maner peculiar unto my self,
inept to all publike Negotiations, answering my speech which is
altogether close, broken, and particular: I have no skill in
ceremonious letters, which have no other substance but a faire
contexture of complemental phrases and curteous words.  I have no
taste nor faculty of these tedious offers of service or affection.  I
believe not so much as is said, and am nothing pleased to say more
than I believe. It is farre from that which is used nowadaies: For,
there was never so abject and servile a prostitution of presentations;
life, soule, devotion, adoration, servant, slave; all these words
are,so generally used, that when they would expresse a more emphatical
intent and respective will, they have no meanes left them to expresse
it.  I deadly hate to heare a flatterer+: which is the cause I
naturally affect a pithy, sinnowie, drie, round, and harsh kind of
speach; which of such as have no further acquaintance with me, is
judged to encline to disdeine.  I honor them most whom I seeme to
regard least: And where my mind marcheth most cheerefully, I often
forget the steps of gravitie: And I offer my selfe but faintly and
rudely to those whose I am indeed, and present my selfe least to such
as I have most given my selfe. Me thinkes they should read it in my
heart, and that the expression of my words wrongeth my conception.  To
welcome, to take leave, to bid farewell, to give thanks, to salute, to
present my service, and such verball complements of the ceremoniall
lawes of our civilitie, I know no man so sottishly-barren of speeche
as my selfe.  And I was never imployed to indite letters of favour or
commendatorie, but he for whom they were, judged them drie barren, and
faint.  The Italians are great Printers of Epistles, whereof I thinke
I have a hundred severall volumes.  I deeme those of Hanniball_Caro%
to be the best.  If all the paper I have heretofore scribled for
ladies were extant, at what time my hand was truly transported by my
passion, a man should haply find some page worthy to be communicated
unto idle and fond-doting youth, embabuinized with this furie.  I ever
write my letters in post-hast, and so rashly headlong, that howbeit I
write intolerably ill, I had rather write with mine owne hand than
imploy another: for I find none that can follow me, and I never copy
them over againe.  I have accustomed those great persons that know me
to endure blots, blurs, dashes, and botches, in my letters, and a
sheete without folding or margine.  Those that cost me either most
labour or studie are they that are least worth.  When I once begin to
traile them, it is a signe my mind is not upon them.  I commonly begin
without project: the first word begets the second.  Our moderne
letters are more fraught with borders and prefaces than with matters,
as I had rather write two than fold and make up one, which charge I
commonly resigne to others: So likewise when the matter is ended, I
would willingly give another the charge to adde these long orations,
offers, praiers, and imprecations, which we place at the end of them,
and wish hartily some new fashion would discharge us of them.  As also
to superscribe them with a legend of qualities, titles, and callings,
wherein, lest I might have tripped, I have often times omitted
writing, especially to men of Justice, Lawyers, and Financiers.  So
many innovations of offices, so difficult a dispensation and ordinance
of divers names and titles of honour, which being so dearely bought,
can neither be exchanged or forgotten without offence.  I likewise
find it gracelesse and idly-fond to charge the front and inscription
of the many bookes and pamphlets which we daily cause to be imprinted
with them.

CHAPTER 1.XL+ THAT THE TASTE OF GOODS OR EVILS DOTH GREATLY DEPEND ON
THE OPINION WE HAVE OF THESE

MEN (saith an ancient Greeke sentence) are tormented by the opinions
they have of things, and not by things themselves.  It were a great
conquest for the ease of our miserable humane condition; if any man
could establish every where this true propositiofi.  For if evils have
no entrance into us but by our judgement, it seemeth that it lieth in
our power either to contemne or turne them to our good: If things
yeeld themselves unto our mercie, why should we not have the fruition
of them or apply them to our advantage?  If that which we call evil
and torment, be neither torment nor evill, but that our fancie only
gives it that qualitie, it is in us to change it: and having the
choice of it, if none compell us, we are very fooles to bandy for that
partie which is irkesome unto us: and to give infirmities, indigence,
and contempt, a sharpe and ill taste, if we may give them a good: And
if fortune simply affoord us the matter, it lieth in us to give it the
forme.  Now that that which we terme evill is not so of it selfe, or
at least such as it is that it depends of us to give it another taste
and another countenance (for all comes to one), let us see whether it
can be maintained.  If the originall being of those things we feare,
had the credit of its owne authoritie to judge it selfe in us, alike
and semblable would it lodge in all: For men be all of one kind, and
except the most or least, they are furnished with like meanes to judge
and instruments to conceive.  But the diversitie of opinions which we
have of those things, doth evidently shew that but by composition they
never enter into us.  Some one peradventure doth lodge them in
himselfe, as they are in essence, but a thousand others give them a
new being, and a contrarie. We accompt of death, of povertie, and of
sorrow, as of our chiefest parts. Now death, which some of all
horrible things all the most horrible, who knowes not how others call
it the only leaven of this lives torments? the soveraigne good of
nature? the only staie of our libertie? and the readie and common
receit of our evils?  And as some doe, fearefully-trembling and
senslesly-affrighted, expect her comming, others endure it more easily
than life: And one complaineth of her facilitie:

  Mors utinam pavidos vitae subducere nolles,

  Sed virtus te sola daret!/1

  O death+!  I would thou would'st let cowards live, That resolv'd
  valour might thee only give.

But let us leave these glorious minds: Theodorus answered Lysimachus,
who threatened to kill him: 'Thou shalt doe a great exploit to come to
the strength of a Cantharides.' {Donne+} The greatest number of
Philosophers are found to have either by designe prevented, or hastned
and furthered their deaths.  How many popular pe-rsons are seene
brought unto death, and not to a simple death, but entermixt with
shame and sometimes with grievous torments, to embrace it with such an
undaunted assurance, some throngh stubborne wilfulnesse, other some
through a naturall simplicitie, in whom is nothing seene changed from
their ordinarie condition; selling their domesticall affaires,
recommending themselves unto their friends preaching, singing, and
entertaining the people: yea, and sometimes uttering words of jesting
and laughter, and drinking to their acquaintance, as well as Socrates?
One who was led to the gallowes, desired it might not be thorow such a
street, for feare a Merchant should set a Serjant on his backe for an
old debt.  Another

----- 1 LUCAN 1. iv. 580.

wished the hang-nian not to touch his throat, lest hee should make him
swowne with laughing, because hee was so ticklish.  Another answered
his confessor, who promised him he should stop that night with our
Saviour in heaven, 'Go thither yourselfe to supper, for I use to fast
a nights.' Another upon the gibbet calling for drinke, and the
hang-man drinking first, said hee would not drinke after him for feare
hee should take the pox of him.  Everie man hath beard the tale of the
Piccard, who being upon the ladder readie to be throwen downe, there
was a wench presented unto him, with this offer (as in some cases our
law doth sometimes tolerate) that if hee would marrie her, his life
should be saved, who after he had a while beheld her, and perceiving
that she halted, said hastily, 'Away, away, good hang-man, make an end
of thy business, she limps.' The like is reported of a man in
Denmarke, who being adjudged to have his head cut off, and being upon
the scaffold, had the like condition offered him, but refused it,
because the wench offered him was jaw-falne, longcheekt, and
sharpe-nosed. A young lad at Tholous being accused of heresie in all
points touching his beleefe referred himselfe wholly to his Masters
faith (a young schollar that was in prison with him) and rather chose
to die than hee would be perswaded that his Master could erre.  We
reade ofthose of the towne of Arras at what time King Lewis the
eleventh tooke it, that amongst the common people many were found who
rather than they would say 'God save the King,' suffered themselves to
be hanged.  And of those base-minded jesters or buffons, some have
beene seene, that even at the point of death would never leave their
jesting and scoffing. {Barnardine+} He whom the heads-man threw off
from the Gallowes cried out, 'Row the Gally,' which was his ordinarie
by-word. Another, who being at his last gaspe, his friends had lain
him upon a pallet alongst the fire-side, there to breathe his last,
the Physitian demanding where his griefe pained him? answered,
'Betweene the bench and the fire:' And the Priest to give the last
unction, seeking for his feet, which by reason of his sicknesse were
shrunken up, he told him 'My good friend, you shall find them at my
legges ends if you look well.' To another that exhorted him to
recommend himselfe to God, he asked, 'Who is going to him?' And the
fellow answering, 'Yourselfe shortly:' 'If it be his good pleasure, I
would to God it might be to morrow nignt,' replied he. 'Recommend but
your selfe to him,' said the other, and you shall quickly be there.'
'It is best then,' answered he, 'that my selfe carry mine owne
commendations to him.' In the, kingdome of Narsinga, even at this day
their Priests wives are buried alive with the bodies of their dead
husbands.  All other wives are burnt at their husbands funerals, not
only constantly, but cheerfully.  When their King dieth, his wives,
his concubines, his minions, together with all his officers and
servants, which make a whole people, present themselves so merrily
under the fire wherein his body is burnt, that they manifestly seeme
to esteeme it as a great honour to accompanie their deceased master to
his ashes.  During our last warres of Millaine, and so many takings,
losses, miseries, and calamities of that Citie the people, impatient
of so many changes of fortune, took such a resolution unto death, that
I have heard my father say he kept accompt of five and twentie chiefe
householders, that in one weeke made them selves away: An accident
which hath some affinity with that of the Xanthians, who being
besieged by Brutus, did pell-mell headlong, men, women, and children,
precipitate them selves into so furious a desire of death, that
nothing can be performed to avoid death which these did not accomplish
to avoid life: So that Brutus had much adoe to save a verie small
number of them.  Every opinion is of sufficient power to take hold of
a man in respect of life.  The first article of that courageous oath
which the countrie of Greece did sweare and keepe in the Median warre,
was that every particular man should rather change his life unto
death, than the Persian lawes for theirs.  What a world of people are
daily seene in the Turkish warres, and the Graecians, more willing to
embrace a sharpe, a bitter, and violent death, than to be
uncircumcized and baptized?  An example whereof no religion is
incapable.  The Kings of Castile having banished the Jewes out of
their countrie, King John of Portugall, for eight crownes a man, sold
them a retreit in his dominion for a certaine time, upon condition
(the time expired) they should avoid, and he find them ships to
transport them into Affrike.  The day of their departure come, which
past, it was expressed that such as had not obeyed should for ever
remain bond-slaves, ships were provided them, but very scarce and
sparingly: And those which were embarked were so rudely, churlishly,
and villainously used by the passengers and marines, who besides
infinite other indignites, loitred so long on the seas, now forward,
now backward, that in the end they had consumed all their victuals,
and were forced, if they would keepe themselves alive, to purchase
some of them, at so excessive a rate and so long, that they were never
set ashore till they had brought them so bare that they had nothing
left them but their shirts.  The newes of this barbarous inhumanitie
being reported to those that were yet on land, most of them resolved
to yeeld and continue bond-slaves: whereof some made a semblance to
change their religion.  Emanuel that immediately succeeded John, being
come to the Crowne, first set them at libertie, then changing his
minde, commanded them to depart out of his dominions, and for their
passage assigned them three ports.  He hoped, as Bishop Osorius%
reporteth (a Latine historian of our ages, not to be despised), that
the favor of the libertie to which he had restored them, having failed
to converte them unto Christianitie, the difficultie to commit
themselves unto marriners and pyrates robberies, to leave a Countrie
where they were settled with great riches; for to goe seeke unknowen
and strange regions, would bring them into Portugall againe.  But
seeing all his hopes frustrate, and that they purposed to passe away,
hee cut off two of the three ports he had promised them, that so the
tedious distance and incommoditie of the passage might retaine some,
or rather that he might have the meane to assemble them altogether in
one place, for a fitter opportunitie of the execution be intended
which was this.  Hee appointed that all their children under fourteene
yeares of age, should be taken from out the hands of their parents,
and removed from their sight and conversation, to some place where
they might be brought up and instructed in our religion.  He saith
that this effect caused an horrible spectacle: the naturall affection
betweene the fathers and the children, moreover the zeale unto their
ancient faith, striving against this violent ordinance.  Divers
fathers and mothers were ordinarily seene to kill themselves, and with
a more cruell example, through compassion and love, to throw their
young children into pitts and wells, thereby to shun the Law.  The
terme which he had prefixed them being expired, for want of other
meanes they yeelded unto thraldome.  Some became Christians, from
whose faith and race, even at this day (for it is an hundred yeares
since) few Portugalls assure themselves; although custome and length
of time be much more forcible counsellors unto such mutations than any
other compulsion.  In the towne of Castelnaw Darry, more than fifty
Albigeois, all heretikes, at one time, with a determined courage
suffred themselves to be burned alive, all in one same fire, before
they would recant and disavow their opinions, Quoties non modo
ductores nostri sed universi etiam exercitus ad non dubiam mortem
concurrerunt?/1 'How often have not only our Leaders (saith Tully),
but also our whole armies, run roundly together to an undoubted
death?' I have seene one of my familiar friends runne furiously on
death, with such and so deepely in his heart rooted affection, by
divers visages of discourse, which I could never suppress in him, and
to the first that offered it selfe masked with a lustre of honour,
without apprehending any shape or violent end, therein to precipitate
himselfe.  We have many

----- 1 CIC.  Tusc.  Qu. 1. i.

examples in our daies, yea in very children, of such as for feare of
some slight incommoditie have yeelded unto death.  And to this
purpose, saith an ancient Writer, what shall we not feare, if we feare
that which cowardice it selfe hath chosen for her retrait?  Heere to
huddle up a long head-rowle of those of all sexes, conditions, sects,
in most happy ages, which either have expected death most constantly,
or sought for it voluntarily, and not only sought to avoid the evils
of this life, but some, only to shun the satietie of living any
longer: and some, for the hope of a better condition elsewhere, I
should never have done.  The number is so infinite, that verily it
would be an easier matter for me to reckon up those that have feared
the same.  Only this more.  Pirro the Philosopher, finding himselfe
upon a very tempestuous day in a boat, shewed them whom he perceived
to be most affrighted through feare, and encouraged them by the
example of an hog that was aitiongst them, and seemed to take no care
at all for the storme: Shall wee then dare to say that the advantage
of reason, whereat we seeme so much to rejoyce, and for whose respect
we account our selves Lords and Emperours of all other creatures, hath
beene infused into us for our torment?  What availeth the knowledge of
things, if through them we become more demisse?  If thereby wee lose
the rest and tranquillitie wherein we should be without them? and if
it makes us of worse condition than was Pirrhos hog?  Shall we employ
the intelligence Heaven hath bestowed upon us for our greatest good,
to our ruine? repugning natures desseign and the universal order and
vicissitude of things, which implieth that every man should use his
instruments and meanes for his owne commoditie? Wel (will some tell
me) let your rule fit you against death, but what will you say of
indigence and necessitie? what will you also say of minde-grieving
sorrow, which Aristippus, Hieronymus, and most of the wisest have
judged-the last evil? {Cordelia+} and those which denied the same in
words confessed the same in effect?  Possidonius being extremely
tormented with a sharpe andf painfull sicknesse, Pompey came to see
him, and excused himselfe he had chosen so unfit an houre to heare him
discourse of Philosophy: 'God forbid (answered Possidonius) that ever
paine should so farre usurpe upon me as to hinder me from discoursing
of so worthy a subject. {Sidney+} And thereupon began to speake of the
contempt of paine.  But there whilst she plaied her part, and
uncessantly pinched and urged him, gainst whom hee exclaimed: 'Paine
doe what thou list, I shall never be drawne to say that thou art an
evill.' That saying, which they would make of such consequence, what
doth it interre against the contempt of paine? it contends but for the
word.  And if the pangs thereof move him not therewhilst, why breakes
he off his discourse for it?  Why thinks he to worke a great exploit,
not to call it an evil?  All doth not consist in imagination.  Heere
we judge of the rest.  It is assured learning that here doth play her
part, our owne senses are judges of it.

  Qui nisi sunt veri; ratio quogue falsa sit omnis./1


  Which senses if they be not true

  All reason's false, it must ensue.

Shall we make our skin beleeve the stripes of a whip doe tickle it?
and perswade our taste that Aloes be wine of Graves?  Pirrhos hog is
here in our predicament.  He is nothing danted at death, but if you
beat him he will grunt, crie, and torment himselfe.  Shall wee force
the general law of nature, which in all living creatures under heaven
is seene to tremble at paine?  The very trees seeme to groane at
offences.  Death is but felt by discourse, because it is the motion of
an instant.

  Aut fuit, aut veniet, nihil est praesentis in illa.


  Death hath come, or it will not misse;

  But in it nothing present is.


  Morsque minus paenae, quam mora mortis habet./1

  Deaths pain's lesse, roundly acted.

  Than when death is protracted.

----- 1 LUCAN. 1. iv. 487. 2 OVID.  Epist.  Ariad. 82.

     A thousand beasts, a thousand men, are sooner dead than
     threatned.  Besides, what wee principally call feare in death, it
     is paine, her customarie fore-runner.  Neverthelesse if we must
     give credit to an ancient father, Malam mortem non facit, nisi
     quod sequitur mortem./1 'Nothing but what follows death makes
     death to be evill.' And I might more truly say, that neither that
     which goeth before, nor that which commeth after, is no
     appurtenance of death, we falsely excuse our selves.  And I find
     by experience that it is rather the impatience of the imagination
     of death that makes us impatient of the paine, and that we feele
     it twofold grievous, forasmuch as it threats us to die.  But
     reason accusing our weaknesse, to feare so sudden a thing, so
     unavoidable, so insensible; we take this other more excusable
     pretence.  All evills that have no other danger but of the evill,
     we count them dangerlesse.  The tooth-ach, the paine of the gowt,
     how grievous soever, because they kill not, who reckoneth them in
     the number of Maladies?  Well, suppose that in death wee
     especially regard the pain: As also povertie hath nothing to be
     feared for but what she casteth upon us through famine, thirst,
     cold, heat, and other miseries, it makes us feele and endure.  So
     have we nothing to doe but with paine.  I will willingly grant
     them that it is the worst accident of our being.  For I am the
     man that hate and shun it as much as possibly may be; because
     hitherto (thanks be unto God) I have no commerce or dealing with
     her: But it is in our power, if not to dissanull, at least to
     diminish the same, through patience+: and though tne body should
     be moved thereat, yet to keepe the minde and reason in good
     temper.  And if it were not so, who then hath brought vertue,
     valour, force, magnanimitie, and resolution {virtues_list_of+}
     into credit?  Where shall they play their part if there be no
     more paine defied?  Avida est periculi virtus: 'Vertue is
     desirous of danger.'{Hotspur+} If a man must not lie on the hard
     ground, armed at all assaies, to endure the heat of the scorching
     Sunne, to

----- 1 SEN.  Quar.  Von. cap iv.

feed hungerly upon a horse or an asse, to see himselfe mangled and cut
in peeces, to have a bullet pluckt out of his bones, to suffer
incisions, his flesh to-be stitcht up, cauterized, and searched, all
incident to amartiall_man+; how shall we purchase the advantage and
preheminence which we so greedily seek after, over the vulgar sort?
It is far from avoiding the evill and paines of it, as wise men say,
that of actions equally good, one should most be wished to be done
wherein is most paine and griefe. Non enim hilaritate nec lascivia,
nec risu aut joco comite levitatis, sed saepe etiam tristes firmitate
et constantia sunt beati:/1 'For men are not happy by mirthfulnesse,
or wantonnesse, or laughing, or jesting, which is the companion of
lightnesse; but often, even those that are sorrowfull, through their
strong heart and constancie.' And therefore was it impossible to
perswade our fathers that conquests achieved by maine force, in the
hazard of warre, were not more available and advantageous than those
obtained in all securitie by practices and stratagems.

  Laetius est, quoties magno sibi constat honestum./2


  Honesty+ makes chiefest chear

  When it doth cost it selfe most deare.

Moreover, this ought to comfort us, that naturally, if paine be
violent, it is also short; if long, it is easie: Si gravis, brevis; si
longus, levis./3 'If it be grievous, it is short; if it be long, it is
light.' Thou shalt not feele it over long; if thou feele it over much,
it will either end it selfe or end thee: All comes to one: If thou
beare not it, it will beare thee away.  Memineris maximos morte
finiri, parvos multa habere intervalla requietis; mediocrium nos esse
dominos: ut si tolerabiles sint feramus: sin minus, e vita, quum ea
non placeat, tanquam e theatre exeamus;/4 'Remember the greatest are
ended with death, the lesser have many pauses of rest; we are masters
of the meane ones: so as if they be tolerable, we may heare them; if
not, we may make

----- 1 CIC.  De Fin. 1. ii. 2 LUCAN. 1. ix. 404. 3 CIC.  De
Fin. 1. ii. 4 Ib. 1.1.

an exit from our life, which doth not please, as from a stage.  That
which makes us endure paine with such impatience is, that we are not
accustomed to take our chiefe contentment in the soule, and that we
doe not sufficiently rely on her, who is the only and soveraigne
mistris of our condition.  The body hath (except the least or most)
but one course, and one byase.  The soule+ is variable in all manner
of formes, and rangeth to her selfe, and to her estate, whatsoever it
be, the senses of the body, and all other accidents.  Therefore must
she be studied, enquired and sought after: and her powerful springs
and wards should be rowzed up.  There is neither reason, nor
prescription, nor force can availe against her inclination and
choice. {constancy+} Of so infinit byases that she hath in her
disposition, let us allow her one suitable and fit to our rest and
preservation: Then shall we not only be sheltered from all offence,
but if it please her, also gratified and flattered of all grievances
and evils.  She indifferently makes profit of all, even errours and
dreames, doe profitably bestead her, as a loyall matter, to bring us
unto safety and contentment.  It may easily be seen, that the point of
our spirit is that which sharpeneth both paine and pleasure in us.
Beasts wanting the same leave their free and naturall senses unto
their bodies: and by consequence, single well-nigh in every kind, as
they shew by the semblable application of their movings.  If in our
members we did not trouble the jurisdiction which in that belongs unto
them, it may be thought we should be the better for it, and that
nature hath given them a just and moderate temperature toward pleasure
and toward paine; And it cannot chuse but be good and just, being
small and common.  But since we have freed and alienated our selves
from her rules, to abandon ourselves unto the vagabond libertie of our
fantasies, let us at least help to bend them to the most agreeing
side.  Plato feareth our sharp engaging unto paine and
voluptuousnesse, forsomuch as he over-strictly tieth and bindeth the
soule unto the body: I am rather opposit unto him, because it is
sundred and loosed from it.

----- 1 AUGUSTIN.  De Civ.  Dei. 1. i. cap. 10.

punishment of mis-deeds) and hiding the same under is cloake, endured
rather to have his guts gnawne out by her, than to discover himselfe.
Another, while offering incense at a sacrifice, suffered his flesh to
burne to the bone by a coale falne into his sleeve, rather than he
would trouble that sacred mysterie.  And a great number have beene
seene, for the only essay of vertue, following their institution, that
at the age of seven years, without so much as changing their
countenance, have endured to be whipped to death.  And Cicero hath
seene whole troups to beat one another so long with their fists, with
their feet, and with their teeth, till they have fainted and fallen
downe halfe dead, before ever they would confesse to be overcome.
Nunquam naturam mos vinceret, est enim ea semper invicta: sed nos
umbris, delitiis, otio, languore, desidia, animum infecimus:
opinionibus maloque more delinitum mollivimus: 'Custome should never
overcome nature, for she is still invincible: but we have infected our
minde with shadowes, daintinesse, idlenesse, faint-heartednesse,
slothfulnesse, and have effeminaied it, inveagled with opinions and
evill customs.' Every man knows the story of Scaevola, who being
entred the enemies campe, with a full resolution to kill their
Chieftaine, and having missed of his purpose, to checke his effect
with a stranger invention, and to cleare his country, confessed unto
Porseniia (who was the King he intended to kill) not only his
dessigne, but added, moreover, that in his campe there were a great
many Romanes, who had undertaken and sworne the verie same enterprise,
and were confederates with him.  And to make shew of his
dread-lessemagnanimitie+, having caused a pan of burning coales to be
brought, he saw and suffred his right arm (in penance that it had not
effected his project) to be parched and well-nigh roasted-off: untill
such time as his enemie himselfe, feeling a kind of remorcefull
horror, commanded the fire to be carried away.  What shall we say of
him that would not vouchsafe to leave, or so much as to

----- 1 CIC.  Tusc.  Qu. 1. iii.

interrupt the reading of his booke, whilst he had an incision made
into him?  And of him who resolved to skoffe and laugh, even in spight
and contempt of the tortures which were inflicted upon him, so that
the raging crueltie of the hangmen that held him, and all the
inventions of torments that could be devised, being redoubled upon
him, one in the necke of another gave him over?  But he was a
Philosopher; What of one of Caesars gladiators, who with a cheerefull
and smiling countenance endured his wounds to be slit and sounded?
Quis mediocres gladiator ingemuit?  Quis vultum mutavit unquam?  Quis
non modo stetit, verum etiam decubuit turpiter?  Quis cum decubuisset,
ferrum recipere jussus, collum contraxit./1 'What meane Fencer hath
once groned?  Which of them hath once changed his countenance?  Which
of them not only hath stood up, but even falne with shame?  Which them
when he was downe, and was willed to take his death, did once shrinke
in his necke?' But let us joyne some women unto them.  Who hath not
heard of her at Paris, which only to get a fresher hew of a new skin,
endured to have her face flead all over?  There are some, who being
sound and in perfit health, have had some teeth puld-out, thereby to
frame a daintier and more pleasing voyce, or to set them in better
order.  How many examples of conternpt of paine or smart have we of
that kind and sex?  What can they not doe?  What will they not doe?
What feare they to doe?  So they may but hope for some amendment of
their beautie?

  Vellere queis cura est albos a stirpe capillos

  Et faciem dempta pelle referre novam./2


  Who take great care to root out their gray haire

  And skin flead-off a new face to repare.

I have seene some swallow gravell, ashes, coales, dust, tallow,
candles, and for the nonce labour and toyle themselves to spoile their
stomacke, only to get

----- 1 CIC.  Tusc.  Qu. 1. ii. 2 TIBUL. 1. i.  El. viii. 43.

a pale-bleake colour.  To become slender in wast, and to have a
straight spagnolized body, what pinching, what girding, what cingling
will they not indure?  Yea sometimes with yron-plates, with
whale-bones, and other such trash, that their very skin and quicke
flesh is eaten in and consumed to the bones; whereby they sometimes
worke their owne death.  It is common to divers nations of our times,
to hurt and gash themselves in good earnest, to give credit to their
words.  And our King reporteth sundrie examples of what himselfe saw
in Polonia, and towards himselfe.  But besides what I know to have by
some beene imitated in France; when I came from the famous Parliament
of BIois, I had a little before seene a wench in Picardie to witnes
the vehemencie of her promises, and also her constancie, with the
bodkin she wore in her hair to give her selfe foure or five thrusts in
her arme, which made her skin to crack and gush out bloud. {Portia+}
The Turkes are wont to wound and scarre themselves for their Ladies
sakes, and that the marke may the better appeare, and continue the
longer, they will presently lay fire upon their cuttes; and to stanch
the bloud, ana better to forme the cicatrice, they wil keepe it on an
incredible while. Honest men that have seene it, have written the
same, and sworne it unto me.  And for ten Aspers you shall daily finde
some amongst them that will give themselves a deepe gash with a
Scimitarie, either in their armes or thighes.  I am very glad
witnesses are so ready at hand where we have most need of them: For
Christendome affordeth many.  And after the example of our holy guide,
there have beene divers who for devotion would needs beare the crosse.
We learne by a worthy testimonie of religion, that Saint Lewes the
King wore a haire shirt, untill such time as he was so aged that his
confessor gave him a dispensation for it; and that every Friday he
caused his priests to beat his shoulders with five little yron
chaines, which to that purpose were ever caried with his nightgeare.
William our last Duke of Guienne, father to that Eleonore who
transferred that Dutchy unto the houses of France and England, the
last ten or twelve yeares of his life, for penance-sake, wore
continually a corselet under a religious habit.  Foulkes Earle of
Anjou went to Jerusalem, there with a rope about his necke to be
whipped by two of his servants, before our Saviours sepulchre. Doe we
not upon every Good-Friday, in sundrie places, see a great number of
men and women scourge and beat themselves so long, till they bruse and
teare their flesh, even to the bones?  I have often seene it my selfe;
and that without enchantment; And some say (for they are masked) there
were some amongst them, who for monie would undertake thereby to
warrant other mens religion, by a contempt of smart-full paine, so
much the greater by how much the stings of devotion are of more force
than those of covetousnes. Q.  Maximus buried his son who had beene
Consull: Marcus Cato his, being elected Pretor; and L.  Paulus both
his, within few daies, with so cheerefull and setled a countenance,
and without any show of sorrow.  I have sometimes by way of jesting
told one that he had confronted divine justice: For, the violent death
of three tall children of his, cumming unto his eares all upon one
day, and sent him, as it may be imagined, as a great scourge: he was
so farre from mourning, that he rather tooke it as a favour and
singular gratification at Gods hand. {Lear+} I doe not follow these
monstrous humours.  Yet have I lost two or three my selfe, whilst they
were young and at nurce, if not without apprehension of sorrow, yet
without continuaece of griefs.  And 'there is no accident woundeth mon
deeper, or goeth so neere the heart as the losse of children.' I see
divers other common occasions of affliction which, were I assailed by
them, I should scarcely feele. And I have contemned and neglected
some, when it hath pleased God to visit me with them, on which the
world setteth so ugly and balefull a countenance, that I hardly dare
boast of them without blushing.  Ex quo intelligitur, non in natura,
sed in opinionw esse aegretudinem./1 'Whereby it is

----- 1 CIC.  Tusc.  Qu. 1. iii.

understood that griefe consisteth not in nature, but opinion.' Opinion
is a powerful, bould, and unmeasureable party.  Who doth ever so
greedily search after rest-full ease and quietnes as Alexander and
Caesar have done after difficulties and unquietnesse?  Terez, the
father of Sitalcez, was wont to say, that when he had no warres, hee
thought there was no difference betweene him and his horse-keeper.
Cato the Consull, to assure himselfe of cortaine townes in Spaine,
having only interdicted some of their inhabitants to weare armes, many
of them killed themselves: Ferox gens nullam vitam rati sine, armis
esse:/1 'A fierce kinde of people, that thought there was no life
without armes.' How many know wee who have abandoned and forsaken the
pleasure of an ease-full and quiet life in their houses, and to live
with their friends and acquaintance, to follow the toyling-horror of
unfrequented deserts, and that yeelded and cast themselves unto the
abjectnesse, contempt and vilifying of the world, wherwith they have
so pleased themselves, as nothing more; Cardinall Boromeus+, who died
lately at Milane, in the midst of the pleasures and debawches to which
his nobilitie, and the great riches he possessed enticed him, and the
ayre of Italy afforded him, and his youth allured him, did ever keep
himselfe in so an austere forme of life, that the same gowne which
served him in summer he wore in winter.  He never lay but upon straw:
the houres which he might conveniently spare from his charge, he
bestowed in continual study, ever kneeling, and having a smal
quantitie of bread and water by his bookes side, which was all the
provision for his repast, and time he employed in study.  I know some
who wittingly have drawne both profit and preferment from cuckoldrie,
the only name whereof is so yrksome and bail-ful to so many men.  If
sight be not the most necessarie of our senses, at least is it the
most pleasing: the most plausible and profitable of our members, seeme
those that serve to beget us: notwithstanding divers have mortally
hated them, only because they were over much amiable, and

----- 1 Liv. 1. xxxiv. c. 17.

for their worths-sake have rejected them.  So thought he of his eies,
that voluntarily put them out.  The most common and soundest part of
men holdeth multitude of children to be a signe of great happinesse
and comfort; So do I, and many others, the want of them.  And when
Thales was demanded wherefore he did not marrie, he answered, because
he would leave no issue or line of himselfe behinde him.  What our
opinion endeareth and increaseth the price of things, it is seene in a
great number of them, which we do not regard to esteeme them, but for
our use.  As we neither consider their qualities nor utilities, but
only our cost to recover and attaine them; as if it were a part of
their substance; and we call that worth in them, not what they bring
us, but what we bring to them.  According as it weigheth and is of
consequence, so it serveth.  Whereupon I perceive we are thriftie
husbands of what we lay out.  Our opinion never suffers it to run a
false gallop. 'The price giveth a Diamond his title, difficultie to
vertue, {Hotspur+} paine unto devotion, and sharpnesse unto physicke.'
Such a one to come unto povertie, cast those fewe crownes he had into
the same sea wherein so many others, with such carke, danger, and
care, on all parts seeke to fish for riches.  Epicurus saith, that 'To
be rich is no ease, but a change of affaires.' Verily, it is not want,
but rather plentie that causeth avarice. I will speake of mine owne
experience concerning this subject.  I have lived in three kinds of
condition since I came out of my infancie.  The first time, which
continued well-nigh twentie yeares.  I have past it over as one who
had no other means but casual, and depending from the direction and
helpe of others, without any certaine maintenance or regular
prescription. My expences were so much the more carelessely layed out
and lavishly employed, by how much more they wholy depended on
fortunes rashnesse and exhibition. I never lived so well at ease: my
fortune was never to finde my friends purse shut; besides which, I was
to frame my selfe to all necessities: the care I tooke to pay every
man at his prefixed day, which a thousand times they have prolonged,
seeing the care I tooke to satisfie them. {Bassanio+} So that I had
gotten unto my selfe the credit of a thriftie kind of good husbandrie,
though it were something shifting and deceitful.  I do naturally feele
a kind of pleasing contentment in paying of my debts, as if I rid my
selfe of a burthenous weight, and free my selfe from the yoake of
bondage and ingratitude+.  Besides, me thinks I feele a kinde of
delight that tickleth me to the quick, in performing a lawfully just
action, and contenting of others.  I except payments that require
delayes, covenants, and after reckonings: for, if I finde any body
that will undertake them, I blushingly and injuriously deferre them as
long as I can, for feare of that altercation or wrangling to which my
humor and manner of speech is altogether incompatible.  There is
nothing I hate more than driving of bargaines: {Shylock+} It is a
meere commerce of dodging and impudencie. After an houres debating and
paltring, both parties will goe from their words and oaths for the
getting or saving of a shilling: yet did I borrow with great
disadvantage.  For, having no heart to borrow before others, or by
word of mouth, I would adventure it upon a peece of paper, which with
some hath no great power to move or force to perswade, and which
greatly helps to refuse, I was wont to commit the successe of my wants
more freely and more carelessely unto fortune than I have done since
unto my wit and providence.  Most good husbands thinke it strange add
horrible to live on such uncertainties, but they remember not that
most men in the world live so. {Bassanio+} How many good and
well-borne men have heretofore, and are daily seene to neglect and
leave at six and seven their patrimonies and certaine goods, to follow
and seeke after court-holy water and wavering favours of Princes and
of fortune; Caesar engaged and endebted himselfe above a million of
gold more than he was worth to become Caesar.  And how many merchants
and poore beginners set up and begin their traffike by the sale of
their farmes or cottages which they ventur to the Indias?

  Tot per impotentia freta;/1

     In so great scarcitie of devotion we have thousands of Colleges,
     which passe the time very conveniently, daily gaping and
     expecting from the libeialitie of the heavens what they must dine
     withall to morrow. Secondly, they consider not that this
     certaintie on which the ground themselves, is not much lesse
     uncertaine and hazardous than hazard+ it selfe.  I see miserie as
     neere beyond two thousand crownes rent, as if it were hard at
     hand.  For, besides that fortune+ hath many-many meanes to open a
     hundred gaps for povertie to enter at, even through the thickest
     of our riches, and that often there is no meane betweene the
     highest and lowest fortune.

  Fortuna vitrea est: tum quum splendet frangitur./2


  Fortune is glasse-like, brittle as 'tis bright

  Light-gon, light-broken, when it lends best light.

And to turne all our defences and raisings of high walls topsie-
turvie: I find that want and necessitie is by diverse or different
causes, as ordinarily seene to accompanie and follow those that are
rich in goods, as those that have none at all: and that peradventure
it is somewhat lesse incommodious when it is alone, than when it
meeteth with riches.  They rather come from order than from receit:
Faber est sua quisque fortunae:/3 'Every man is the forger of his own
fortune.' And methinkes that a rich man who is needy, full of
businesse, carke and toyle, and troubled in minde, is more miserable
than he that is simply poore.  In divitiis inopes quod genus egestatis
gravissimum est./4 'In their abundance indigent, which is the most
grievous kinde of indigence.' The richest and greatest princes are
ordinarily urged by povertie and need unto extreme necessities.  For,
can any be more extreme than thereby to become Tyrants, and unjust
usurpers of their subjects goods.  My second manner of life hath

----- 1 CATUL.  Epig. iv. 18. 2 PUBLIUS SYRUS. 3 SALLUST.  Orat. i. ad
Caes. 4 SEN.  Epist. lxxiv.

beene to have money; which when I had once fingred, according to my
condition I sought to hoard up some against a rainie day; esteeming
that it was no having unlesse a man had ever somewhat besides his
ordinary expenses in possession: and that a man should not trust that
good which he must live in hope to receive; and that, be his hopes
never so likely, hee may many wayes be prevented.  For, I would say
unto my selfe; what if I should be surprised by this chance or that
accident?  What should I doe then?  And in pursuit of these vaine and
vicious imaginations, I endeavour by hooke or crooke, and by wile or
wit, to provide by this superfluous sparing for all inconveniences
that might happen: And I could answer him that would alleage the
number of inconveniences to be over infinit: which if they followed
not all men, they accompaitied some, and haply the greatest number. An
apprehension which I did not passe without some painfull care.  I kept
the matter secret, and I (that dare say so much, of myself) would
never speake of my money but falsly; as others doe, who being rich,
would seeme to be poore, or being poore, would appeare rich: and
dispense with their conscience, never to witnesse sincerely what they
are worth.  Oh ridiculous and shamefull prudence+.  Did I travell any
where? me thought I was never sufficiently provided; and the more I
had laden my selfe with coine, the more I had also burdened my selfe
with feare: sometimes of my wayes-safetie, othertimes of their trust
that had the charge of my sumpters and baggage, whereof as some others
that I know, me thought I was never throughly assured, except it were
still in my sight.  Left I my keyes or my purse behind me? how many
suspitions and thornie imiginations, and which is worse,
incommunicable, did uncessantly haunt me?  My minde was ever on my
halfpenny; my thoughts ever that way.  The summe being rightly cast,
there is ever more paine in keeping than in getting of
monie. {Shylock+} If I did not altogether so much as I say, I at the
least endeavoured to doe it.  Of commoditie I had little or nothing.
To have more meanes of expenses, is ever to have increase of sorrow.
For (as said Bion) 'The hairie man doth grieve as much as the bald, if
he have his haire pulled out.' And after you are once accustomed, and
have fixed your thoughts upon a heape of monie, it is no longer at
your service; you dare not diminish it; it is a building which, if you
touch or take any part from it, you will thinke it will all fall.
Necessitie must first pinch you by the throat, and touch you neere,
before you will lay hands on it.  And I should sooner pawne my
clothes, or sell my horse with lesse care and compulsion, than make a
breach into that beloved purse which I kept in store.  But the danger
was that a man can hardly prefix a certaine limits unto his desire
(they are hard to be found in things a man deemeth good) and continue
at one stay in sparing: A man shall ever encrease this heape from one
number to another; yea so long till he basely and niggardly deprive
himselfe of enjoying his owne goods, and wholly fix on the safe
keeping of them, and never use them.  According to this kinds of
usage, those are the richest people of the world have the charge of
keeping the gates and walles of a rich Cittie.  Every monied man is
covetous, according to mine opinion.  Plato marshalleth this humane or
corporall goods; health, beautie, strength, riches:{Houyhouyhnms+} And
riches (saith he) are not blind, but cleere-seeing, if they be
illummated by wisdome.  Dionysius the younger plaid a notable part;
who being advertised that one of his Siracusans had hidden a certaine
treasure under the ground, commanded him to bring it unto him, which
he did, reserving secretly one part of it unto himselfe, with which he
removed his dwelling unto another Citie, where having lost the humor
of hoarding up of treasure, began to live a spending and riotous kinde
of life: which Dionysius hearing, commanded the remainder of his
treasure, and which he had taken from him, to be restored unto him;
saying, that 'sithence he had learned how to make use of it, hee did
most willingly redeliver the same unto him.' I was some yeares of the
same humour: I wot not what good Demon did most profitably remove me
from it, like to the Siracusan, and made me to neglect my sparing.
The pleasure I apprehended of a farre and chargeable journey having
overthrowne this foolish imagination in me; From which I am falne into
a third kinde of life (I speake what I thinke of it) assuredly much
more pleasing and formall: which is, that I measure my garment
according to my cloth, and let my expenses goe together with my
comming in; sometimes the one, otherw- hilst the other exceeds: But
they are never farre asunder.  I live from hand to mouth, from day to
day, and have I but to supply my present and ordinarie needs, I am
satisfied: As for extraordinarie wants, all the provisions of the
world will not suffice them.  And it is folly to expect that fortune+
will ever sufficiently arme us against herselfe.  It is with our owne
weapons that we must combat her.  Casuall armes will betray us, when
we shall have most need of them.  If I lay up anything, it is for the
hope of some imployment at hand, and not to purchase lands, whereof I
have no need, but pleasure and delight.  Non esse cupidum, pecunia
est: non esse emacem, vectigal est:/1 'It is currant coine not to be
covetous: it is a thriftie income not to be still buying.' I am
neither possessed with feare that my goods shall faile me, nor with
desire that they should encrease and multiply.  Divitiarum fructus est
in copia; Copiam declarat satietas:/2 'The fruit of riches is in
plentie: satietie content with enough, approves that plentie.' And I
singularly gratifie my selfe this correction came upon me in an age
naturally inclined to covetousnesse and that I am free from that folly
so common and peculiar to old men, {avarice+} and the most ridiculous
of all humane follies.  Feraulez who had passed through both fortunes,
and found that encrease of goods was no accrease of appetite to
drinke, to eat, to sleepe, or to embrace his wife; and who on the
other side felt heavily on his shoulders the impor

----- 1 CIC.  Paradox. vi. c. 3. 2 Ib. c. 2.

tunitie of ordering and directing his Oeconomicall affaires, as it
doth on mine, determined with himselfe to content a poore young man,
his faithfull friend, greedily gaping after riches, and frankly made
him a present donation of all his great and excessive riches;
{Antonio+} as also of those he was likely everie day to get by the
liberalitie and bountie of his good master Cyrus and by warre: always
provided hee should undertake to entertaine and finde him, honestly
and in good sort, as his guest and friend.  In which estate they lived
afterward most happily, and mutually content with the change of their
condition.  Loe heare a part I could willingly find in my heart to
imitate.  And I much commend the fortune of an old prelate, whom I see
to have so clearly given over his purse, his receits, and his
expenses, now to one of his chosen servants, and now to another, that
he hath lived many yeares as ignorant of his houschold affaires as any
stranger.  The confidence in others honesty is no light testimonie of
ones owne integritie: therefore doth God willingly favour it.{trust+}
And for his regard, I see no household order, neither more worthily
directed, nor more constantly managed than his.  Happy is that man
that hath so proportionably directed his estate, as his riches may
discharge and supply the same, without care or encombrance to
himselfe: and that neither their consultation or meetings may in any
sort interrupt other affaires, or disturbe other occupations, which
followeth, more convenient, more quiet, and better agreeing with his
heart.  Therefore doth ease and indigencie depend from every mans owne
opinion; and wealth and riches, no more than glorie or health, have
either more preheminence or pleasure, than he who possesseth them,
lendeth them. Every man is either or ill, according as he findes
himselfe.  Not he whom another thinkes content, but he is content
indeed that thinkes he is so himselfe; And only in that, opinion
giveth it selfe essence and veritie. Fortune doth us neither good nor
ill: She only offereth us the seed and matter of it, which our minde,
more powerfull than she, turneth and applieth as best it pleaseth: as
the efficient cause and mistris of condition, whether happy or
unhappy.  External accessions take both favor and colour from the
internall constitution: As garments doe not warme us by their heat,
but by ours, which they are fit to cover and nourish: he that with
clothes should cover a cold body, should draw the very same service
from them by cold.  So is snow and yce kept in summer. Verily as unto
an idle and lazie body, study is but a torment: abstinence from wine
to a drunkard is a vexation; frugalitie is a harts sorrow to the
luxurious; and exercise molesteth an effeminate body: so is it of all
things else.  Things are not of themselves so irksome nor so hard, but
our basenes and weaknesse maketh them such.  To judge of high and
great matters, a high and great minde is required; otherwise we
attribute that vice unto them which indeed is ours.  A straight oare,
being under water seemeth to be crooked.  It is no matter to see a
thing, but the matter is how a man doth see the same.  Well, of so
many discourses, which diversly perswade men to contemne death and
patiently to endure paine, why shall we not finde some one to make for
our purpose; And of so severall and many kinds of imaginations, that
have perswaded the same unto others, why doth not every man apply one
unto himselfe, that is most agreeing with his humor; If he cannot
digest a strong and abstersive drug, for to remove his evill, let him
at least take a lenitive pill to ease the same.  Opinio est quaedam
effoeminata ac levis: nec in dolore magis, quam eadem in voluptate:
qua, quum liquescimus fluimusque mollitia, apis aculeum sine clamore
ferre, non possumus. - Totum in eo est, ut tibi imperes:/1 'There is a
certaine effeminate and light opinion, and that no more in sorrow than
it is in pleasure, whereby when we melt and run over in daintie
tendernes, we cannot abide to be stung of a bee, but must rore and
crie out.  This is the total summe of all, that you be master of your
selfe. 'Moreover, a man doth not escape from

----- CIC.  Tusc.  Qu. 1. ii. c. 22.

Philosophy by making the sharpnes of paines and humane weaknesse to
provaile so far beyond measur: for she is compelled to cast her selfe
over againe unto these invincible replications.  If it be bad to live
in necessitie, at least there is no necessitie to live in necessitie.
No man is long time ill but by his owne fault.  He that hath not the
heart to endure neither life nor death, and that will neither resist
nor run away, what shall a man doe to him?

CHAPTER 1.XLI+ THAT A MAN SHOULD NOT COMMUNICATE HIS GLORIE+

OF all the follies of the world, the most universall, and of most men
received, is the care of reputation and study of glorie, to which we
are so wedded that we neglect and cast-off riches, friends, repose,
life and health (goods effectuall and substantiall), to follow that
vaine image, and idlie-simple voice, which hath neither body nor
hold-fast.

  La fama, ch'invaghisce a un dolce suono

  Gli superbi mortali, et par si bella

  E un echo, un sogno, anzi d'un sogno un ombra,

  Ch, ad ogni vento si dilegua e sgombra./1


  Faine that enveagl's high aspiring men

  With her harmonious sound, and seemes so faire

  An Eccho is, a dreame, dreames shadow rather

  Which flies and fleets as any winde doth gather.

And of mens unreasonable humours, it seemeth that the best
philosophers doe most slowly and more unwillingly cleare themselves of
this than of another: it is the most peevish, the most froward, and
the most opinative. Quia etiam bene proficientes animos tentare non
cessat:/2 'Because it ceaseth not to tempt even those Mindes that
profit best.' There are not many whereof reason doth so evidently
condemne the vanitie, but it is so deeply rooted in us, as I wot not
whether any man could ever clearely discharge himselfe of
it. {Hotspur+} When you have alleaged all the reasons you can, and
beleeved all to disavow and reject her, she produceth,

----- 1 TASS.  Gier. can. xiv. st. 63. 2 AUGUSTIN.  De Civ.  Dei,
1. v. c. 14.

contrarie to your discourses, so intestine inclination, that you have
small hold against her.  For (as Cicero saith), 'Even those that
appugne her, will neverthelesse have the bookes they write against her
to beare their names upon their fronts, endeavouring to make
themselves glorious by despising of glorie.' All other things fall
within the compasse of commerce: we lend our goods, we employ our
lives, if our friends stand in need of us: But seldome shall we see a
man communicate his honour, share his reputation, and impart his
glorie unto others.  Catulus Luctatitis in the warres against the
Cymbres, having done the utmost of his endeavours to stay his
souldiers that fled before their enemies, put himselfe amongst the
runawaies, and dissembled to bee a coward, that so they might rather
seeme to follow their Captaine than he from the enemie: This was a
neglecting and leaving off his reputatation, to conceale the shame and
reproach of other.  When Charles the fifth passed into Provence, the
yeare a thousand five hundred thirtie seven, some are of opinion that
Anthony de Leva, seeing the Emperor his master resolutely obstinate to
undertake that voyage, and deeming it wonderfully glorious, maintained
neverthelesse the contrarie, and discounselled him from it, to the end
that all the honour and glorie of this counsell might be attributed
unto his Master; and that it might he said, his good advice and
foresight to have beene such; that contrarie to all mens opinions, he
had achieved so glorious an enterprise: Which was, to honour and
magnifie him at his owne charges.

Thracian Ambassadors comforting Archileonida, the mother of Brasidas,
for the death of her son, and highly extolling and commending him,
said he had not left his equall behind him.  She refused this private
commendation and particular praise, assigning it to the publike
state. 'Doe not tell me that (quoth she), for knowe the Cittie of
Sparta hath many greater and more valiant Citizens than he was.' At
the battell of Crecy, Edward the blacke Prince of Wales, being yet
very young, had the leading of the vant-gard: The greatest and chiefe
violence of the fight was in his quarter: The Lord and Captaine that
accompanied him, perceiving the great danger, sent unto King Edward,
the Princes Father, to come and help them: which when he heard, he
enquired what plight his sonne was in, and how he did, and hearing
that he was living and on horse-backe, 'I should (quoth he) offer him
great wrong to goe now, and deprive him of the honour of this combats
victorie, which he already hath so long sustained; what danger soever
there be in it, it shall wholly be his:' and would neither go nor send
unto him: knowing that if he had gone or sent, it would have beene
said that without his ayd all had beene lost, and that the advantage
of this exploit would have beene ascribed unto him.  Semper enim quod
postremum adjectum est, id rem totam videtur traxisse:/1 'For evermore
that which was last added, seemes to have drawne on the whole matter.'
In Rome many thought, and it was commonly spoken, that the chiefest
glorious deeds of Scipio were partly due unto Laelius, who
notwithstanding did ever advance the greatnesse, further the glorie,
and second the renowne of Scipio, without any respect of his owne. And
Theopompus King of Sparta, to one who told him that the commonwealth
should subsist and continue still, forsomuch as he could command so
well: 'No,' said he, 'it is rather because the people know so well how
to obey.' As the women who succeeded in the Peeredomes of France had
(notwithstanding their sex) right to assist and privilege to plead in
cases appertaining to the jurisdictions of Peeres: so the
Ecclesiasticall Peeres, notwithstanding their profession and function,
were bound to assist our Kings in their warres, not only with their
friends, servants, and tenants, but in their owne person.  The Bishop
of Beauvais, being with Philip Augustus in the battell of Bovines, did
very couragiously take part with him in the effect: but thought hee
should not be partaker of the fruit and glorie of that bludy and
violent exercise.  He overcame and forced that day

----- 1 TIT.  Liv. 1. xxvii. c. 45.

CHAPTER 1.XLII+ OF THE INEQUALITIE THAT IS BETWEENE US

PLUTARKE saith in.some place, that he findes no such great difference
betweene beast and beast, as he findeth diversitie betweene man and
man.' He speaketh of the sufficience of the minde and of internall
qualities. Verily I find Epaminondas so farre (taking him as I suppose
him) from some that I know (I meane capable of common sense) as I
could finde in my heart to endeare upon Plutarke, and say there is
more difference betweene such and such a man than there is diversitie
betweene such a man and such a beast.

  Hem vir viro quid praestat!/1


  O Sir, how much hath one.

  Another man out-gone?

And that there be so many degrees of spirits as there are steps
betweene heaven and earth and as innumerable.  But concerning the
estimation of men, it is marvell that, except our selves, no one thing
is esteemed but for its proper qualities.  We commend a horse because
he is strong and nimble,

         ----- volucre

  Sic laudamus equum, facili cui plurima palm

  Fervet, et exultat rauco victoria circa,/2


  We praise the horse, that beares most bells with flying,

  And triumphs most in races hoarse with crying,

and not for his furniture: a greyhound for his swiftnesse, not for his
collar: a hawke for her wing, not for her cranes or bells.  Why do we
not likewise

----- 1 TER.  Phor. act v. sc. 3. 2 JUVEN.  Sat. viii. 57.

esteeme a man for that which is his owne?  He hath a goodly traine of
men following him, a stately pallace to dwell in, so great credit
amongst men, and so much rent comming in.  Alas, all that is about him
and not in him.  No man will buy a pig in a poke.  If you cheapen a
horse, you will take his saddle and clothes from him, you will see him
bare and abroad: or if he be covered as in old tines they wont to
present them unto Princes to be sold, it is only his least necessarie
parts, lest you should ammuse your selfe to consider his colour or
breadth of his crupper; but chiefly to view his legs, his head, his
eyes, and his foot, which are the most remarkable parts, and above all
to be considered and required in him.

  Regibus hic mos est, ubi equos mercantur, operto

  Inspiciunt, ne sifacies, ut saepe, decora

  Molli fulta pedi est, emptorem inducat hiantem.

  Quod pulchra clunes, breve quod caput, ardua cervix./1


  This is Kings manner, when they horses buy

  They see them bare, lest if, as oft we try

  Faire face have soft hoofes, gull'd the, buyer be

  They buttockes round, short head, high crest may see.

When you will esteeme a man, why should you survey him all wrapt and
envelloped? He then but showeth us those parts which are no whit his
owne, and hideth those from us by which alone his worth is to be
judged.  It is the goodnesse of the sword you seeke after, and not the
worth of the scabbard; for which peradventure you would not give a
farthing if it want his lyning.  A man should be judged by himselfe,
and not by his complements.  And as an Ancient saith very pleasantly:
Doe you know wherefore you esteeme him tall?  You account the height
of his pattens.  The base is no part of his stature: measure him
without his stilts.  Let him lay aside his riches and externall
honours, and shew himselfe in his shirt.  Hath he a body proper to his
functions, sound and cheerefull?  What minde hath he?  Is it faire,
capable and unpolluted, and happily provided with all her 1 HOR. 1. i.
Sat. ii. 86.  necessary parts?  Is shee rich of her owne or of others
goods?  Hath fortune nothing of hers to survey therein?  If
broad-waking she wil looke upon a naked sword: {courage+} if shee care
not which way her life goeth from her, whether by the mouth or by the
throat, whether it be setled, equable, and contented.  It is that a
man must see and consider, and thereby judge the extreme differences
that are betweene us.  Is he

         ----- sapiens, sibigue imperiosus

  Quem neque pauperies, neque mors neque vincula terrent,

  Responsare cupidinibus, contemnere honore

  Fortis et seipso totus teres atque rotundu

  Externi ne quid valeat per laeve morari

  In quem manca ruit semper fortuna?/2


  A wise man, of himselfe commander high

  Whom want, nor death, nor bands can terrifie

  Resolv'd t'affront desires, honors to scorne

  All in himselfe, close, round and neatly-borne

  As nothing outward on his smooth can stay

  Gainst whom still fortune makes a lame assay.


Such a man is five hundred degrees beyond kingdomes and
principalities: himselfe is a kingdome unto him selfe.

  Sapiens pol ipse fingit fortunam sibi./2


  Trust me, who beares a wise mans name,

  His fortune to himselfe may frame.


What is there else for him to wish for?

         ----- nonne videmu

  Nil aliud sibi naturam latrare, nisi ut quoi

  Corpore sejunctus dolor absit, mente fruatu

  Incundo sensu, cura semiotus metugue?/3


  See we not nature nothing else doth barke

  Unto her-selfe, but be, whose bodies bark

  Is free from paines-touch, should his minde enjoy

  Remov'd from care and feare, with sense of joy!I

Compare unto him the vulgar troupes of our men, stupid, servile,
wavering, and continually floting on the tempestuous ocean of divers
passions which

----- 1 HOR. 1. ii.  Sat. vii. 83. 2 PLAU.  Trin. act ii. sc. 2. 3
LUCR. 1. ii. 16.

tosse and retosse the same, wholy depending of others.  There is more
difference than is betweene heaven and earth, and yet such is the
blindnesse of our custome that we make little or no account of it.
Whereas, if we consider a cottager and a king, a noble and a
handycrafts man, a magistrate and a private man, a rich man and a
poore, an extreme disparitie doth immediately present itselfe unto our
eies, which, as a man may say, differ in nothing but in their
clothes. {equality+} In Thrace, the King was after a pleasant manner
distinguished from his people, and which was much endeared.  He had a
religion apart: a God severall unto himselfe, whom his subjects might
no waies adore.  It was Mercurie: and he disdained their gods, which
were Mars, Bacchus, ,and Diana; yet are they but pictures which make
no essential dissemblance.  For, as enterlude- plaiers, you shal now
see them on the stage play a King, an Emperor, or a Duke, but they are
no sooner off the stage but they are base rascals, vagabond abjects,
and porterly hirelings, which is their naturall and originall
condition.  Even so the Emperor whose glorious pomp doth so dazzle you
in publike:

  Scilicet et qrandes viridi cum luce smaragdi

  Auro includuntur, teriturque Thalassina vestis

  Assidue, et Veneris sudorem exercita potat./1


  Great emeralds with their grass-greene light in gol

  Are clos'd, nor long can marriage linnen hold

  But worne with use and heat of Venerie drinks the sweat:


View him behinde the curtaine, and you see but an ordinarie man, and
peradventure more vile and more seely than the least of his subjects.
Ille beatus introrsum est; istius bracteata faelicitas est:/2 'One is
inwardly happy: anothers felicitie is plated and guilt-over.'
Cowardise, irresolution, ambition, spight, anger, and envie, move and
worke in him as in another:

  Non enim gazae, neque consulari

  Summovet lictor miseres tumultus

----- 1 LUCR. 1. iv. 2 SEN.  Epist. xv.

  Mentis, et curas, laqueata circu

  Tecta volantes:/1


  Nor treasures, nor Maires officers remov

  The miserable tumults of the minde

  Or cares that lie about, or flie abov

  Their high-roof't houses with huge beames combinde.

And feare, and care, and suspect haunt and follow him, even in the
middest of his armed troupes.

  Re veraque metus hominum, curaeque sequaces

  Nec metuunt sonitus armorum, nec fera tela,

  Audacterque inter reges, rerumque potente

  Versantur, neque fulgorem reverentur ab auro./2


  Indeed mens still-attending cares and feare

  Nor armor's clashing, nor fierce weapons feare

  With Kings converse they holdly, and Kings peeres

  Fearing no lightning that from gold appeares.

Doth the ague, the megrim, or the gout spare him more than us?  When
age shall once seize on his shoulders can then the tall yeomen of his
guard discharge him of it?  When the terror of ruthless balefull death
shall assails him, can he be comforted by the assistance of the
gentlemen of his chamber? If he chance to be jealous or capricious,
will our lowting curtzies, or putting off of hatts, bring him in tune
againe?  His bedstead enchased all with gold and pearles hath no
vertue to allay the pinching pangues of the cholicke.

  Nec calidae citius decedent corpore febres

  Textilibus si in picturis ostroque rubent

  Iacteris, quam si plebeia in veste cubandum est./3


  Feavers no sooner from thy body fli

  If thou on arms or red scarlet li

  Tossing, than if thou res

  On coverlets home-drest.

The flatterers of Alexander the great made him beleeve that he was the
sonne of Iupiter; but being one day fore-hurt, and seeing the bloud
gush out of

----- 1 HOR. 1. ii.  Od. xvi. 9. 2 LUCRET. 1. ii. 46. 3 Ib. 34.

his wounds: 'And what thinke you of this? (said he unto them), Is not
this bloud of a lively red hew, and meerly humane?  Methinkes it is
not of that temper and which Homer faineth to trill from the gods
wounds.' Hermodorus the Poet made certaine verses in honour of
Antigonus, in which he called him the sonne of Phoebus; to whom he
replied: 'My friend, he that emptieth my close-stools knoweth well
there is no such matter.' He is but a man at all assaies: And if of
himselfe he be a man ill-borne, the Empire of the whole world cannot
restore him.

         ----- puella

  Hunc rapiant, quicquid calcaverit, hic rosa fiat./1

  Wenches must ravish him, what ever he

  Shall tread upon, eftsoones a rose must be.

What of that?  If he be of a grose, stupide, and senseles minde:
voluptuousnesse blockquoteand good fortune it selfe, are not perceived
without vigor, wit and livelinesse.

  Haec perinde sunt, ut illius animus qui ea possidet

  Qui uti scit, ei bona, illi qui non utitur recte, mala./2

These things are such, as the possessors minde Good, if well us'd; if
ill, them ill we finde.  hatsoever the goods of fortune are, a man
must have a proper sense to favour them: It is the enjoying, and not
the possessing of them, that makes us happy.  Non domus et fundus, non
aeris acervus et auri

  Aegroto domini deduxit corpore febres

  Non animo curas; valeat possessor oportet

  Qui comportatis rebus bene cogitat uti

  Qui cupit, aut metuit, juvat illum sic domus aut res,

  Ut lippum pictae tabulae, fomenta podagram./3


  Not house and land, and heapes of corne and gold

  Rid agues, which their sicke Lords body hold

  Or cares from minde: th' owner must be in health,

  That well doth thinke to use his hoarded wealth

  Him that desires or feares, house, goods deligh

  As foments doe the gout, pictures sore-sight.

----- 1 PERS.  Sat. ii. 1. 39. 2 TER.  Heaut. act i. sc. 2. 3
HOR. 1. i.  Epist. ii. 47.

He is a foole, his taste is wallowish and distracted, he enjoyeth it
no more than one that hath a great cold doth t he sweetnesse of Greeke
wine, or a horse the riches of a costly faired furniture, wherewith he
is trapped.  Even as Plato saith, 'That health, beautie, strength,
riches, and all things else he calleth good, are equally as ill to the
unjust as good to the just; and the evil contrariwise.' And then,
where the body and the soule are in ill plight, what need these
externall commodities? seeing the least pricks of a needle and passion
of the mind is able to deprive us of the pleasure of the worlds
Monarchy.  The first fit of an ague, or the first gird that the gout
gave him, what avails his goodly tales of Majesty?

  Totus et argento conflatus, totus et auro:/1


  All made of silver fine

  All gold pure from the mine

Doth he not forthwith lose the remembrance of his pallaces and states?
If be be angrie or vexed, can his principalitie keepe him from
blushing, from growing pale, from gnashing his teeth like a Bedlam?
Now if it be a man of worth, and well borne, his royaltie and his
glorious titles will add but little unto his good fortune.

  Si ventri bene, si lateri est, pedibusque tuis, nil

  Divitiae poterunt regales addere majus./2


  If it be well with belly, feet, and sides.

  A Kings estate, no greater good provides.

He seeth they are but illusions and vain deceits.  He may haply be of
King Seleucus his advice: 'That he who fore-knew the weight of a
sceptre, should he finde it lying on the ground, he would not daigne
to take it up." This he said by reason of the weightie, irksome and
painfull charges that are incident unto a good King.  Truely, it is no
small in matter to govern others, since so many crosses and
difficulties offer themselves, if we will govern ourselves
well. {Lear+} Touching commanding

----- 1 TIBUL. i.  El. vii. 71. 2 HOR. 1. i.  Epist. xii. 5.

of others, which in show seemeth to be so sweet, considering the
imbecillitie of mans judgement, and the difficultie of choice in new
and doubtful things: I am confidently of this opinion, that it is much
more easie and plausible to follow than to guide: and that it is a
great setling of the minde to be tied but to one beaten-path, and to
answer but for himselfe.

  Ut satius multo jam sit, parere quietum

  Quam regere imperio res velle./1


  Much better 'tis in quiet to obey

  Than to desire with Kings-power all to sway.

Seeing Cyrus said, that it belongs not to a man to command that is not
of more worth than those whom he commandeth.' But King Hieron in
Xenophon addeth moreover, 'That in truly enjoying of carnall
sensualities, they are of much worse condition than private men:
forasmuch as ease and facilitie depriveth them of that sowre-sweet
tickling which we finde in them.'

  Pinguis amor nimiumque potens, in taedia nobis

  Vertitur, et stomacho dulcis ut esca nocet./2


  Fat over-powerfull love doth loathsome grow

  As fulsome sweet-meats stomackes overthrow.

Thinke wee that high-minded men take great pleasure in musicke?  That
satietie thereof makes it rather tedious unto them.  Feasts, banquets,
revels, dancings, masks and turneys, rejoyce them that but seldome see
them, and that have much desired to see them: the taste of which
becommeth cloysome and unpleasing to those that daily see and
ordinarily have them: Nor doe ladies tickle those that at pleasure and
without suspect may be glutted with them.  He that cannot stay till he
be thirsty, can take no pleasure in drinking. Enterludes and
commedies, rejoyce and make us merry, but to players they are tedious
and tastelesse.  Which to prove, we see it is a delight for Princes,
and a recreation for them, sometimes to disguise themselves,

----- 1 LUC. 1. v. 1137. 2 OVID.  Amor. 1. ii.  El. xix. 25.

and to take upon them a hase and popular kinde of life.

  Plerumque gratae principibus vices

  Mundaeque parvo sub lare pauperu

  Caenae sine aulaeis et ostro

  Sollicitant explicuere frontem./1


  Princes doe commonly like enterchange

  And cleanely meales where poore-men poorely house,

  Without all tapistrie or carpets strange

  Unwrinkled have their care-knit, thought-bent browes.

Nothing doth sooner breed a distaste or satietie than plentie.  What
longing lust would not bee alaid to see three hundred women at his
dispose and pleasure as hath the Grande Turke in his Seraille?  And
what a desire and shew of hawking had he reserved to himselfe from his
ancestors, that never went abroad without seven thousand falkners at
least?  Besides which, I thinke, the luster of greatnesse brings no
small incommodities to the enjoying of sweeter pleasures: they lie too
open and are too much in sight.  And I wot not why a man should longer
desire them to conceale or hide their fault; for what in us is
indiscretion the people judgeth to be tyrannie, contempt, and disdaine
of the laws in them: And besides the ready inclination unto vice, it
seemeth they also adde unto it the pleasure of gourmandizing, and to
prostrate publicke-observances under their feet.  Verily Plato in his
Gorgias defineth him to be a tyrant+ that in a Citie hath leave and
power to do whatever he list.  And therefore often the show and
publication of their vice hurteth more than the sinne it selfe.  Every
man feareth to be spied and controlled; which they are even in their
countenances and thoughts: all the people esteeming to have right and
interest to judge of them.  And wee see that blemishes grow either
lesser or bigger according to the eminence and light of the place
where they are set, and that a mole or a wart in ones forehead is more
apparently perceived than a scarre in another place.  And that is the
reason why Poets faine

----- 1 HOR. 1. iii.  Od. xxix. 13.

Jupiters loves to have beene effected under other countenances than
his owne; and of so many amorous shifts and love practices they impute
to him, there is but one (as farre as I remember) where he is to be
seene in his greatnesse and majestie.  But returne we to Hieron: he
also relateth how many incommodities he findeth in his royaltie, being
so barred that he cannot at his libertie travell goe whether he
pleaseth, being as it were a prisoner within the limits of his
country; and that in all his actions he is encircled and hemd-in with
an importunate and tedious multitude. Truely, to see Our Princes all
alone, sitting at their meat, beleagred round with so many talkers,
whisperers, and gazing beholders, unknowne what they are or where they
come, I have often rather pittied than envied them.  King Alphonsus
was wont to say, that 'burthen bearing asses were in that in farre
better condition than Kings; for their masters suffer them to feed at
their ease, whereas Kings cannot obtaine that privilege of their
servants.' And it could never fall into my minde that it might be any
speciall commoditie to the life of a man of understanding to have a
score of find- faults, picke-thanks, and controllers about his
close-stoole, nor that the service of a man that hath a thousand pound
rent a yeare, or that hath taken Casal, or defended Sienna, is more
commodious or acceptable to him than that of a sufficient and
well-experienced groome.  Princelike advantages are in a manner but
imaginarie preheminences.  Every degree of fortune hath some image of
Principalitie: Caesar termeth all the Lords, which in his time had
justice in France, to be Kinglets, or pettie Kings. And truly, except
the name of Sire, we goe very farre with our Kings.  Looke but in the
Provinces remote and farre from the court: As for example, in
Britaine, the attending traine, the flocking subjects, the number of
officers, the many affaires the diligent service, the obsequious
ceremonies of a Lord, that liveth retired, and in his own house,
brought up amongst his own servants, tenants, and followers: And note
also the high pitch of his imaginations and humours, there is no
greater royaltie can be seene: He heareth no more talke of his master
than of the Persian King, and hapily but once a year; And knowes but
some farre-streicht and old kindred or pedigree, which his Secretarie
findes or keepes upon some ancient record or evidence. Verily our
lawes are very free, and the burthen of soveraigntie doth scarsly
concerne a gentleman of France twice in his whole life.  Essentiall
and effectuall subjection amongst us doth not respect any but such as
allure themselves unto it, and that affect to honour, and love to
enrich themselves by such service: For he that can shrowd and retire
himselfe in his owne home, and can manage and direct his house without
sutes in lawe, or quarrell with his neighbours, or domesticall
encombrances, is as free as the Duke of Venice.  Paucos servitus,
plures servitutem tenent:/1 'Service holds few, but many hold
service.' But above all things Hieron seemeth to complaine that he
perceiveth himselfe deprived of all mutuall friendship, reciprocall+
societie, and familiar conversation, wherein consisteth the most
perfect and sweetest fruit of humane life.  For, what undoubted
testimonie of affection and good will can I expect or exact from him,
that, will he or nill he, oweth me all he hath, all he can?
{gratitude+} Can I make account of his humble speech, of his low
lowting curtzie, or of his courteous offers, since it lieth not in his
power to refuse them me?  The honour we receive of those which feare
and stand in awe of us, is no true honour.  Such respects are rather
due to royaltie, to majestie, than to me. {Lear+}

         ----- maximum hoc reqni bonum est

  Quod facta domini cogitur populus sui

  Quam ferre, tam laudare./2


  This is chiefe good of Princes domination

  Subiects are forc't their sovraignes actes and fashions

  To beare with patience, passe with commendations.

Doe I not see that both the bad and the good king are served alike?
That hee who is hated and he that

----- 1 SEN.  Epist. 22. 2 SEN.  Thyest. act ii. sc. 1.

is beloved are both courted alike?  And the one as much fawned upon as
the other?  My predecessor was served with the same appearances, and
waited upon with the like ceremonies, and so shall my successor be.
If my subiects offend me not, it is no testimonie of any good
affection.  Wherefore shall I take it in that sense, sithence they
cannot, if they would?  No man followeth me for any friendship that is
betweene him and me: inasmuch as no firme friendship can be contracted
where is so small relation, so slender correspondencie, and such
disparitie.  My high degree hath excluded me from the commerce of men.
There is too great an inequalitie and distant disproportion.  They
follow for countenance and of customs, or rather my fortune than my
selfe: hoping thereby to increase theirs.  Whatsoever they say, all
they doe unto me is but a glosse, and but dissimulation, their
libertie being every where brideled and checked by the great power I
have over them.  I see nothing about me but inscrutable hearts, hollow
mindes, fained lookes, dissembled speeches, and counterfeit actions.
His Courtiers one day commended Julian the Emperor for ministring of
rights and doing of justice. 'I should easily grow proud' saith he,
'for these praises, if they came from such as durst either accuse or
discommend my contrary actions, should I commit any.' {Lear+} All the
true commodities that Princes have are common unto them with men of
meane fortune.  It is for Gods to mount winged horses, and to feed on
Ambrosia.  They have no other sleepe, nor no other appetite than ours.
Their steele is of no better temper than that wherewith we arme our
selves.  Their crowne, their diadem can neither hide them from the
Sun, or shelter them from the raine. {common+} Dioclesian, that wore
one, so much reverenced and so fortunate, did voluntarily resigne the
same, to withdraw himselfe unto the pleasure of a private life; but a
while after, the urgent necessitie of publicke affaires requiring his
presence, and that he should returne to re-assume his charge again, he
answered those that solicited him unto it, 'You would never undertake
to perswade me to that had you but seene the goodly rankes of trees
which my selfe have planted in mine Orchard, or the faire muske-melons
I have set in my garden.' According to Anacharsis his opinjon, 'The
happiest estate of a well-ordered commonwealth should be, where all
other things being equally common, precedencie should be measured and
preferments suited according to vertue and desert, {meritocracy+} and
the contrarie according to vice.' At what time King Pirrhus undertooke
to passe into Italy, Cyneas his wise and trustie counsellor, going
about to make him perceive the vanitie of his ambition, one day
bespake him thus: 'My good sir,' said he, 'to what end doe you prepare
for so great an enterprise?' He answered suddenly, 'To make my selfe
Lord of Italie.' 'That done, what will you doe then?' replied Cyneas,
'I will then passe,' said Pirrhus, 'into Gaule, and then into Spaine.'
'And what afterwards?' 'I will then invade Affrike, and subdue the
same; and at last, when I shall have brought all the world under my
subjection, I will then take my rest, and live contented at mine
ease.' 'Now, for Gods sake, sir,' replied Cyneas, 'tell me what
hinders you that you be not now, if so you please, in that estate?
Wherefore doe you not now place your selfe where you meane to aspire,
and save so much danger, so many hazards, and so great troubles as you
enterpose betweene both?'

  Nimirum quia non bene norat quae esset habend

  Finis, et omnino quoad crescat vera voluptas./1


  The cause forsooth, he knew not what should be the end

  Of leaving, nor how far true pleasure should extend.


I will conclude and shut up this treatise with an ancient verse, which
I singularly applaud and deeme fit to this purpose.

  Mores cuique sui fingunt fortunam./2


  Ev'ry mans manners and his mind,

  His fortune+ to him frame and find. {economics_rules+}

----- 1 LUCR. 1. v. 2 CORN.  NEPOS, Vit.  Attici.  CIC.  Paradox. v.

CHAPTER 1.XLIII+ OF SUMPTUARIE LAWES, OR LAWES FOR MODERATING OF
EXPENCE

THE manner wherewith our Lawes assay to moderate the foolish and vaine
expences of table-cheare and apparell seemeth contrarie to its end.
The best course were to beget in men a contempt of gold and
silkwearinge as of vaine and non-profitable things, whereas we
encrease their credit and price: a most indirect course to withdraw
men from them.  As, for example, to let none but Princes eat dainties,
or weare velvets and clothes of Tissew, and interdict the people to
doe it, what is it but to give reputation unto those things, and to
encrease their longing to use them?  Let Kings boldly quit those
badges of honour; they have many other besides: Such excesse is more
excusable in other men than in Princes. {Lear+} We may, by the
examples of divers Nations, learne sundrie better fashions to
distinguish our selves and our degree+s (which truly I esteeme
requisit in an estate) without nourishing to that purpose this so
manifest corruption and apparant inconvenience.  It is strange how
custome in these indifferent things doth easily encroach and suddenly
establish the footing of her authoritie.  We had scarce worne cloth
one whole yeare at the Court, what time we mourned for our King Henrie
the second, but certainly in every mans opinion all manner of silks
were already become so vile and abject, that was any man seene to
weare them he was presently judged to be some countrie fellow or
mechanicall man.  They were left only for Chyrurgians and
Physitians. And albeit most men were apparreled alike, yet were there
other sufficient apparant distinctions of mens qualities.  How soone
doe plaine chamoy-jerkins and greasie canvase doublets creepe into
fashion and credit amongst our souldiers if they lie in the field?
And the garishnesse, neatnesse, and riches of silken garments grow in
contempt and scorne? {PlainDealer+} Let Kings first begin to leave
these superfluous expenses.  We shall all follow, and within a moneth,
without edicts, ordinances, proclamations, and acts of Parliament, it
will be observed as a law.  The statutes should speake contrarie, as
thus: That no man or woman, of what qualitie soever, shall, upon paine
of great forfeitures, weare any manner of silke, of scarlet, or any
goldsmiths worke, except only Enterlude-players, Harlots, and
Curtizans. With such an invention did Zeleucus whilome correct the
corrupted manners of the Locrines.  His ordinances were such: 'Be it
enacted that no woman of free condition shall have any more than one
maid-servant to follow her when she goeth abroad, except when she
shall be drunken: And further, that she-may not goe out of the Citie
by night, nor weare any jewels of gold or precious stones about her,
nor any gowne beset with goldsmiths worke or enbroiderie, except she
be a publike-professed whore: and moreover, that except panders and
bawds, it shall not be lawfull for any man to weare any gold-rings on
his fingers, nor any rich garments, as are such of cloth made in the
Citie of Miletum.' So did he by these reproachfull exceptions
ingeniously drive his Citizens from vaine superfluities and pernicious
dainties.  It was a most profitable course, by honour and ambition to
allure men unto their dutie and obedience.  Our Kings have the power
to addresse all these externall reformations.  Their inclination
serveth them as a law. Quicquid Principes faciunt, praecipere
videntur: 'Whatsoever Princes doe, that they seeme to command.' The
rest of France takes the modell of the court as a rule unto it selfe
to follow.  Let Courtiers first begin to leave off and loathe there
filthy and apish breeches that so openly shew our secret parts: the
bumbasting of long pease-cod bellied doublets, which makes us seeme so
far from what we are, and which are so cumbersome to arme: These long,
effeminate, and dangling locks: That fond custome to kisse what we
present to others, and Beso las manos in saluting of our friends (a
ceremonie heretofore only due unto princes): And for a gentleman to
come to any place of respect, without his rapier by his side, all
unbraced, all untrust, as if he came from his close-stoole; And that
against our forefathers manner, and the particular libertie of our
French nobilitie, we should stand hare-headed, aloofe-off from them,
wheresoever they be; and as about them, about many others: So many
petty- kings and petty-petty-kinglets have we now adayes: And so of
other like new-fangled and vicious introductions: They shall soone he
seene to vanish and be left.  Although but superficiall faults, yet
are they of evill presages. And we are warned that the foundation or
maine summers of our houses faile and shrinke, when we see the
quarters bend or wals to breake.  Plato in his lawes thinkes there is
no worse plague, or more pernicious in his Citie, than to suffer youth
to have the reines of libertie in her owne hand, to change in their
attires, in their gestures, dances, exercises, and songs, from one
forme to another: And to remove their judgement, now to this, now to
that place; following newfangled devices, and regarding their
inventors: By which old customes are corrupted, and ancient
institutions despised. In all things, except the wicked, mutation is
to be feared; yea, even the alteration of seasons, of winds, of
livings, and of humours.  And no lawes are in perfect credit but those
to which God hath given some ancient continuance: so that no man know
their, of-spring, nor that ever they were other than they are.
CITAPTER 1.XLIV+ OF SLEEPING REASON doth appoint us ever to walke in
one path, but not alwaies to keepe one place: and that a wise man
should not permit humane passions to stray from the right carrier; he
may (without prejudice unto his dutie) also leave it unto them either
to hasten or to slow his pace, and not place himselfe in an immoveable
and impassive Colossus. Were vertue herselfe corporeall and incarnate,
I think her pulse would beat and worke stronger, marching to an
assault, than going to dinner: For it is necessarie that she heat and
move herselfe.  I have therefore markt it as a rare thing to see great
personages sometimes, even in their weightiest enterprises and most
important affaires, hold themselves so resolutely-assured in their
states that they doe not so much as breake their sleep for them.
Alexander the Great, on the day appointed for that furious-bloudy
battel against Darius, slept so soundly and so long that morning, that
Parmenion was faine to enter his chamber, and approching neere unto
his bed, twice or thrice to call him by his name, to awaken him, the
houre of the battle being at hand, and urging him.  Otho the Emperour
having determined to kill himselfe, the very same night, after he had
given order for his domestical affaires, shared his monie among his
servants, and whetted the edge of a sword, wherewith he intended to
wound himselfe, expecting no other thing but to know whether all his
friends were gone to rest, fell into so sound a sleepe that the
groomes of his chamber heard him snort in another roome.  This
Emperours death hath many parts semblable unto that of great Cato, and
namely this: For Cato being prepared to defeat himselfe, whilest he
expected to heare newes whether the Senators, whom he caused to retire
were lanched out from the haven of Utica, fell so fast asleep that he
was heard to snort into the next chamber; and he whom he had sent
toward the port having waked him to tell him the storme was so rough
that the Senators could not conveniently put out to sea, he sent
another, and lying downe anew, fell asleep again untill the last
messenger assured him they were gone.  We may also compare him unto
Alexander in that great and dangerous storme which threatned him, by
the sedition of Metellus the Tribune, who laboured to publish the
decree of Pompeys re-appeall unto the Citie, together with his army,
at what time the commotion of Catiline was on foot: against which
decree only Cato did insist, and to that purpose had Metellus and he
had many injurious speeches, and menaced one another in the Senate-
house: and it was the next day they were like to come to the execution
in the market-place, where Metellus, besides the favour of the common
people and of Caesar, then conspiring and complotting for the
advancement of Pompey should come, accompanied with a multitude of
strange and forraine slaves and fencers, to doe their utmost.  And
Cato+, strengthened with his only constancie and with unmated resolve:
so that his kinsmen, his familiars, and many honest men tooke great
care, and were in heavy anxiety and pensivenesse for him: of which
many never left him all night, but sat up together without rest,
eating, or drinking, by reason of the danger they saw prepared for
him; yea, his wife and sisters did nought but weep and waile, and for
his sake torment themselves in their house, whereas contrariwise he
alone conforted every body, and blamed them for their demissenesse.
And after he had supped (as he was wont) he went quietly to his bed,
and slept very roundly untill the next morning, that one of his
copartners in the Tribune-ship came to call him to go to the skirmish.
The knowledge we have of this mans unmated-haughty heart by the rest
of his life, may make us judge with all securitie that it only
proceeded from a spirit so far elevated above such accidents that he
dained not so much as to trouble his minde with them no more than with
ordinarie chances.  In the sea-fight which Augustus gained against
Sextus Pompeius in Sicilie, even at the instant he should goe to
fight, was surprised with so heavy a sleep that his friends were
compelled to awaken him to give the signall of the battell, which
afterward gave occasion unto Marcus Antonius to charge him with this
imputation, that he had not dared with open eyes to survey the
marshalling of his army, and that his heart would not suffice him to
present himselfe unto his soldiers untill such time as Agrippa brought
him newes of the victorie he had obtained of his enemies.  But
concerning young Marius, who committed a greater errour (for on the
day of his last battell against Sylla, after he had marshalled his
army and given the word or signall of the battell) he lay downe in the
shadow under a tree a while to rest himselfe, and fell so fast asleep
that he could hardly be waked with the rout and flight of his men,
having seene no part of the fight, they say it was because he was so
exceedingly aggravated with travell, and over- tired with weaknesse
and want of sleep, that nature was overcome, and could no longer
endure.  And touching this point, Phisitians may consider whether
sleep be so necessarie that our life must needs depend on it, for we
finde that Perseus King of Macedon, prisoner at Rome, being kept from
sleep, was made to die; but Plinie aleageth that some have lived a
long time without any sleep at all.  And Herodotus reporteth there are
nations where men sleep and make by halfe yeares.  And those that
write the life of Epimenides the wise, affirm that he slept the
continuall space of seven and fifty yeares.

CHAPTER 1.XLV+ OF THE BATTELL OF DREUX

THERE hapned divers rare accidents and remarkable chances in our
battell of Dreux, but those who doe not greatly favour the reputation
of the Duke of Guise doe boldly aleage that he cannot be excused to
have made a stand and temporised with the forces he commanded, whilst
the Lord Constable of France, General of the Armie, was engaged and
suppressed with the enemies artillerie, and that it had beene better
for him to hazard himselfe to charge the enemie flankwise, than by
expecting any advantage to have him come behind him, to suffer so
reproachfull an overthrow and so shamefull a losse.  But omitting what
the event thereof witnessed, he that shall without passion debate the
matter shall easily (in my conceit) confesse that the ayme and drift,
not only of a captaine, but of every particular souldier, ought
chiefly to respect a victory in great: and that no particular
occurrences, of what consequence soever, or what interest may depend
on them, should ever divert him from that point.  Philopoemen, in an
encounter with Machanidas, having sent before a strong troupe of
archers and good marke men to begin the skirmish, and the enemie,
after he had put them to rout anu disranked them, ammusing himselfe in
mainly pursuing them, and following the victory alongst the maine
battel where Philopoemen was, although his souldiers were much moved
and offended to see their fellows put to the worst, he could not be
moved to bouge from his place, nor make head against his enemie to
succour his men; but rather, having suffered them to be defeated and
cut in peeces before his face, began then to charge his enemies in the
battalion of their infanterie when he perceived them forsaken of their
horsemen.  And albeit they were Lacedemonians, forasmuch as he charged
them at what time (supposing to have gained the day) they began to
disorder themselves, he easily overcame them, which done, he pursued
Machanidas.  This case is cousin-german unto that of the Duke of
Guise.  In that sharpe-bloody battell of Agesilaus against Boeotians,
which Xenophon (who was there present) saith to have beene the hottest
and rudest that ever he had seene, Agesilaus refused the advantage
which fortune presented him, to let the battallion of the Baeotians
passe, and to charge them behind, what certaine victorie soever he saw
likely to follow the same, esteeming that it were rather skill than
valour; and to shew his prowesse and matchlesse-haughty courage, chose
rather to charge them in the front of their forces.  But what
followed? He was well beaten and himselfe sore-hurt, and in the end
compelled to leave his enterprise and embrace the resolution which in
the beginning he had refused, causing his men to open themselves to
give passage unto that torrent of the Boeotians who when they were
past through, perceiving them to march in disaray, as they who
perswaded themselves to be out of all danger, he pursued them and
charged them flankwise.  All which notwithstanding, he could never put
to rout or force them run-away, for they orderly and faire and softly
made their retreit, ever showing their face, until such time as they
got safely into their holds, and trenches.

CHAPTER 1.XLVI+ OF NAMEBS

WHAT diversitie soever there be in herbs, all are shuffled up together
under the name of a sallade.  Even so upon the consideration of naimes
I will here huddle up a gallymafry of diverse articles.  Every several
nation hath some names which, I wot not how, are sometimes taken in
ill part: as with us, Iacke, Hodge, Tom, Will, Bat, Benet, and so
forth.  Item it seemeth that in the genealogies of Princes there are
certaine names fatally affected; as Ptolomeus with the AEgyptians,
Henries in England, Charles in France, Baldwins in Flanders, and
Williams in our ancient Aquitanie, whence some say came the name of
Guienne; which is but a cold invention: As if in Plato himselfe there
were not some as harsh and ill-sounding. Item, it is an idle matter,
yet nevertheless, by reason of the strangenesse, worthy the memorie,
and recorded by an ocular witnesse, that Henric Duke of Normandie,
sonne to Henrie the second King of England, making a great feast in
France, the assembly of the Nobilitie was so great, that for pastimes
sake, being, by the resemblance of their names, divided into severall
companies: in the first were found a hundred and ten Knights sitting
at one table and all called Williams; besides private gentlemen and
servants.  It is as pleasant to distribute the tables by the names of
the assistants as it was unto Geta the Emperor, who would have all his
messes of dishes served in at his table orderly according the first
letters of their names: As, for example, those that began with P, as
pig, pie, pike, puddings, pouts, proke, pancakes, &c. were all served
in together; and so of all the rest.  Item, it is a common saying,
'That it is good to have a good name:' As much to say, good credit or
good reputation. Yet verily it is very commodious to have a
well-sounding and smooth name, and which is easie to be pronounced,
and facile to be remembered: For Kings, Princes, Lords, and
Magistrates know and remember us the better by them, and will not so
soone forget us.  Marke but of those that serve and follow us, whether
we doe not more ordinarily command and sooner employ such whose names
come readier to our tongue or memorie.  I have seene our King Henrie
the second, who could never hit on the right name of a Gentleman of
Gascoigne, and did ever call a Lady waiting on the Queene by the
generall surname of her house, because that of her father was so harsh
and hard to be remembered. And Socrates saith: 'It ought to be a
fathers speciall care to give his children good and easie-sounding
names.' Item, it is reported that the foundation of our Lady, the
great at Poitiers had this heginning: 'A licentious young man having
his dwelling-house where the Church now standeth, had one night gotten
a wench to lie with him, who so soone as she came to bed, he demanded
her name, who answered Marie: The youne man bearing that name, was
suddenly so strucken with a motive of religion, and an awefull respect
unto that sacred name of the virgin Marie, the blessed mother of our
Saviour and Redeemer, that he did not onely presently put her away
from him, but reformed all the remainder of his succeeding life: And
that in consideration of this miracle there was first erected a
chappell in the place where this young mans house stood, consecrated
unto that holy name, and afterward the faire great Church which yet
continueth.' This vocal and auricular correction, and so full of
devotion, strucke right unto his soule.  This other following, of the
same kind, insinuated it selfe by the corporall senses.  Pythagoras
being in companie with two young men, whom he heard complot and
consult (being somewhat heated with feasting and drinking) to go and
ravish a chast-house, commanded immediately the minstrels to change
their tune; and so by a solemne, grave, severe, and spondaicall kinde
of musicke, did sweetly inchaunt, allay, and in-trance their rash,
violent, and law-lesse lust.  Item, shall not succeeding posteritie
say that our moderne reformation hath been exact and delicate, to have
not only oppugned and resisted errors and vices, and filled the world
with devotion, humilitie, obedience, peace, and every other kinde of
vertue, but even to have combated their ancient names of baptisme,
Charles, Lewis, Francis, to people the world with Methusalem,
Ezechiel, Malachie, much better feeling of a lively faith?  A
Gentleman my neighbour esteeming the commodities of ancient times in
regard of our daies, forgot not to sledge the fiercenesse and
magnificence of the names of the Nobilitie of those times, as Don
Grumedan, Quedragan, and Agesilan: And that, but to hear them sounded,
a man might easily perceive they had been other manner of men than
Peter, Guilliam, or Michell.  Item, I commend and am much beholding to
Iames Amiot, in the course of a French oration of his, to have still
kept the full ancient Latine names, without disguising or changing
them, to give them a new French cadence.  At the first they seemed
somewhat harsh unto the reader: but now, by reason of the credit which
his Plutarke hath deservedly gotten amongst us, custome has removed
all strangenesse from us.  I have often wished that those who write
histories in Latine, would leave us our names whole, and such as they
are: For, altering Vaudemont to Vallemontanus, and metamorphosing them
by muting them to the Grecian or Latin tongue, we know not what to
make of them, and are often at a non- plus.  To conclude my discourse:
It is an ill custome, and of exceeding bad consequence in our countrie
of France, to call every man by the name of his Towne, Mannor, Hamlet,
or Lordship, as the thing that doth most confound houses, and bring
surnames out of knowledge.  A cadet or yonger- brother of a good
house, having had for his appanage a Lordship, by whose name he hath
been knowne and honoured, cannot well forsake and leave the same ten
yeares after his death: his Lordship commeth unto a stranger, who doth
the like: Ghesse then where we are, and how we shall doe to come to
the perfect knowledge of these men.  We need not goe far for other
examples, but looke into our Royall house, where so many partages, so
many surnames, and so many severall titles have so encumbred us, that
the originall of the stocke is utterly lost.  There is so much
libertie in these mutations, that even in my time I have seene no man
nor woman advanced by fortune into some extraordinarie preferment,
that hath not immediately had adjoined unto him or her genealogicall
titles, new and unknowne to their fathers, and that hath not been
engraffed into some noble stocke or family.  And as good lucke
serveth, the basest upstart and most obscure houses are most apt unto
adulteration and falsification.  How many privat Gentlemen have we in
France which, according to their accompt and blazoning of their
gentrie, are of the royall house or race? {Stone+} I beleeve more than
others.  Was it not prettily said, and with a good grace, by one of my
friends?  There was a great companie banded together about a quarrell
which a Gentleman had with another, who in very truth had some
prerogative of titles, honours, and alliances above the common sort of
Nobilitie; upon which word of his prerogative, every one seeking to
equall himselfe unto him, alleaged, some one ofspring, some another,
some the resemblance of his name, some of his armes, othersome an old
farfetcht pedigree, and the meanest of them to be the great grandchild
of some King beyond the seas.  When they came all to dinner, this man,
whom hitherto they had all followed, in liew of taking his wonted
place, making low lowting reverences, went to the lowest end of the
board, entreating the companie to hold him excused, that through rash-
unadvisednesse he had hitherto lived with them companion-like, but now
being lately enformed of their right qualities, he began to know them
according to their ancient degrees, aud that it did not duly belong
unto him to sit above so many Princes.  And after he had acted his
play, he began to raile upon them with a thousand injuries; saying
thus unto them: For the love of God, content your selves with what
your forefathers have been contented, and with the state whereto God
hath called us; we have sufficient if we can maintaine it well, let us
not disparage the fortune and condition of our predecessors, and
reject we these fond imagitiations, which cannot faile any man,
whatsoever he be, that is so imprudent as to alleage them.  Crests,
Armes, and Coats have no more certaintie than surnames.  I beare Azure
seme of trefoiles, a Lions Paw in faece.  Or armed Gules.  What
privilege hath this Coat, that it should for ever continue
particularly to my house?  A sonne in law will transferre the same
into another family: Some silly upstart purchaser of Armes will make
it his chiefe Coat. 'There is nothing wherein meet so many alterations
and so much confusion.  But this consideration draweth me perforce
unto another field.  Let us somewhat narrowly search into, and for
God's sake consider, on what foundation we ground this glorie and
reputation, for which the world is turned topsie-turvie.  On what do
we establish this transitorie renowne, which with so great
mind-possessing toyle and industrie we seek and gape- after?  In fine,
it is Peter or William that beareth the same (marke it well, reader)
and to whom it belongeth.  Is not hope a courageous facultie, which in
a mortall subject, and in a moment, seeks to usurp infinitie and
immensitie, and to replenish his Masters indigence with the
posesession of all things he can imagine or desire before it would?
Nature hath given us a pleasant joy to play withall in that.  Is it
Peter or William.  And what is that but a word for al mouths? or three
or foure dashes of a pen, first, so easie to be varied, as I would
willingly ask those whom the honor of so many victories concerneth, or
whether Guesquin, or Glesquin, or Gueaquin? yet were there more
apparence her than in Lucian that [Greek letter] did sue T. for

         ----- non levia aut ludicra petuntu

  Praemia:/1


  No light prize, no reward in jest

  Is hunted after as the best.

The wager goeth deepe: The question is, which letter must be paid with
so many sieges, battels, hurts, emprisonments, and services done unto
the Crowne of France by her ever renowned Constable.  Nicholas Denisot
hath had no care but of the letters of his name, and hath changed all
the contexture of them, thereout to frame the Earl of Alsinoss, whom
he hath honoured and presenteth with the glorie of his Poesie and
Painting.  And Suetonius the historian hath loved but the sense of his
owne, and having taken away Lenis, which was his fathers surname, hath
left Tranquillus successor of his compositions reputation.  Who would
beleeve Captain Bayard hath no honour but that which he hath borrowed
from the acts of Peter Terraill?  And that Antonio Escalin (even
before his eies) suffered Captaine Poulin, and the Baron of La Garde,
to steal so many Navigations, voyages, and attempts, both by sea and
land, from him?  Secondarily, they are dashes and trickes of the pen,
common unto a thousand men. many are there in all races or families
both of one name and surname!  And how many in divers families, races,
ages, and countries?  Historie hath knowne three Socrates, five
Platoes, eight Aristotles, seven Xenophons, twenty Demetrius, twenty
Theodores: besides which, imagine how many came not to her knowledge.
Who letteth my horse boy to call himselfe Pompey the great?  But after
all, what meanes, what devices are there that annex unto my
horse-keeper deceased, or to that other who had his head cut off in
AEgypt, or that joyne unto them this glorified and farrenowned word
and these pen- dashes so much honoured, that they may thereby
advantage themselves?  Id cinerem et manes credis curare sepultos?/2

  Thinke you, ghosts buried, ashes dead

  Care much how we alive are sped?

----- 1 VIRG.  AEn. 1. xii. 764. 2 Id. 1. iv. 34.

What feeling motion of revenge have the two companions in chiefe valor
amongst men: Epaminondas of that glorious verse, which so many ages
since is so common in our mouthes for him?

  Consiliis nostris laus est attrita Laconum./1


  By our complots the haught renowne

  Of Spartan Gallants was brought downe.

And Africanus of that other;

  A sole exoriente supra Maeotis palude

  Nemo est, qui factis me aequiparare queat?/2


  From Sun rise to the Scythian-lake, of fam

  None in exploits can equalize my name.

Those that survive are tickled with the pleasure of these words, and
by them solicited with jealousie and desire, doe presently without
consideration transmit by fantasie this their proper motion of revenge
unto the deceased; and with a fond-deceiving hope perswade,
themselves, when their turne commeth, to be capable of it.  God he
knowes it, neverthelesse:

         ----- ad haec s

  Romanus Grajusque et Barbarus Induperato

  Erexit, causas dicriminis atque labori

  Inde habuit, tanto major famae sitis est, quam

  Virtutis/3


  Heerto himselfe the Romane Generall

  The Grecian, the Barbarian, rouz'd and rais'd;

  Heere hence drew cause of perils, travells all

  So more, than to be good, thirst to be prais'd.

---- 1 CIC.  Tusc.  Qu. 1. v. 2 Ib. 3 Juv.  Sat. x. 137.

CHAPTER 1.XLVII+ OF THE UNCERTAINTIE OF OUR JUDGEMENT

IT is even as that verse saith,


  'Ev@wv a@ VOX@s YO/16S 1,9.  K, 1yo..


  Of words on either side

  A large doale they divide.

There is law sufficient to speake every where, both pro and contra.
As for example:

  Vince Hannibal, et non seppe usar'poi

  Ben la vittoriosa sua ventura./1


  Hanniball conquer'd, but he knew not after

  To use well his victorious good fortune.

He that shall take this part, and with our men go about, to make that
over-sight prevaile, that we did not lately pursue our fortune at
Montcontour: Or he that shall accuse the King of Spaine, who could not
use the advantage he had against us at Saint Quintin, may say this
fault to have proceeded from a minde drunken with his good fortune,
and from a courage ful-gorged with the beginning of good lucke; loseth
the taste how to encrease it, being already hindred from digesting
what he hath conceived of it: He hath his hands full, and cannot take
hold any more: Unworthy that ever fortune should cast so great a good
into his lap: For, what profit hath he of it, if, notwithstanding, he
give his enemie leasure and meanes to recover himselfe? What hope may
one have, that he will once more adventure to charge these re-enforced
und re-united forces, and new armed with despite and

----- 1 PETRARCA.

vengeance, that durst not, or knew not how to pursue them, being
dismaied and put to rout?

  Dum fortuna calet, dum conficit omnia terror./1


  While fortune is at height in heat.

  And terror worketh all by great.

But to conclude, what can he expect better than what he hath lately
lost? It is not, as at Fence, where the number of venies given gets
the victorie: So long as the enemie is on foot, a man is newly to
begin.  It is no victorie, except it end the warre.  In that conflict
where Caesar had the worse, neere the Citie of Oricum, he reprochfully
said unto Pompeis souldiers, that he had utterly beene overthrowne,
had their Captaine knowne how to conquer, and paid him home after
another fashion when it came to his turne.  But why may not a man also
hold the contrarie?  That it is the effect of an insatiate and
rash-headlong mind, not to know how to limit or period his
covetousnesse: That it is an abusing of Gods favours to goe about to
make them lose the measure he hath prescribed them, and that anew to
cast himselfe into danger after the victorie, is once more to remit
the same unto the mercie of fortune: That one of the chiefest policies
in militarie profession is not to drive his enemie unto despaire.
Silla and Marius in the sociall warre, leaving discomfited the
Marsians, seeing one squadron of them yet on foot, which through
despaire, like furious beasts were desperately comming upon them,
could not be induced to stay or make head against them.  If the fervor
of Monsieur de Foix had not drewne him over rashly and moodily to
pursue the straglers of the victorie at Ravenna, he had not blemished
the same with his untimely death; yet did the fresh- bleeding memorie
of his example serve to preserve the Lord of Anguien from the like
inconvenience at Serisoles.  It is dangerous to assaile a man whom you
have bereaved of all other meanes to escape or shift for himselfe but
by his weapons; for necessitie is a violent school mistris, and

----- 1 LUCAN. 1. vii. 734.

which teacheth strange lessons: Gravissimi stint morsus irritatae
necessitatis. 'No biting so grievous as that of necessitie provoked
and enraged.'

  Vincitur haud gratis jugulo qui provocat hostem/1


  For nought you over-come him not,

  Who bids his foe come cut his throat

And this is the reason why Pharax empeached the King of Lacedemon, who
came from gaining of a victorie against the Mantinaeans, from going to
charge a thousand Argians, that were escaped whole from the
discomfiture; but rather to let them passe with all libertie, lest he
should come to make triall of provoked and despited vertue, through
and by ill fortune. Clodomire King of Aquitaine, after his victorie,
pursuing Gondemar King of Burgundie, vanquished and running away,
forced him to make a stand, and make head again: but his unadvised
wilfulnesse deprived him of the fruit of the victorie, for he dyed in
the action.  Likewise he that should chuse, whether it were beet to
keepe his souldiers richly and sumptuously armed, or only for
necessitie, should seeme to yeeld in favour of the first, whereof was
Sertorius, Philopoemen, Brutus, Caesar, and others. urging that it is
ever a spur to honour and glorie for a souldier to see himselfe
gorgeously attired and richly armed, and an occasion to yeeld himselfe
more obstinate to fight, having the care to save his armes, as his
goods and inheritince.  A reason (saith Xenophon) why the Asiatikes
carried with them, when they went to warres, their wives and
concubines; with all their jewels and chiefest wealth.  And might also
encline to the other side, which is, that a man should rather remove
from his shoulder all care to preserve himselfe, than to increase it
unto him: for by that meanes he shall doubly feare to hazard or engage
himselfe, seeing these rich spoiles doe rather increase an earnest
desire of victorie in the enemie: and it hath beene observed that the
said respect hath sometimes

----- 1 LUCAN. 1. iv. 278.

wonderfully encouraged the Romans against the Samnites.  Antiochus
shewing the armie he prepared against them, gorgeously accoutred with
all pompe and statelinesse, unto Hanniball, and demanding of him
whether the Romanes would be contented with it: 'yea, verily,'
answered the other, 'they will be very well pleased with it: They must
needs be so, were they never so covetous.' Licurgus forbad his
Souldiers, not onely all manner of sumptuousnesse in their equipage,
but also to unease or strip their enemies when they overcame them,
willing, as he said, that frugalitie and povertie should shine with
the rest of the battell.  Both at sieges and elsewhere, where occasion
brings us neere the enemie, we freely give our souldiers libertie to
brave, to disdaine, and injure him with all manner of reproaches: And
not without apparence of reason; for it is no small matter to take
from them all hope of grace and composition, in presenting unto them
that there is no way left to accept it from him whom they have so
egregiously outraged, and that there is no remedie left but from
victorie.  Yet had Vitellius but had successe in that; for, having to
deale with Otho, weaker in his souldiers valor, and of long
disaccustomed from warre, and effeminated through the delights and
pleasures of the Citie, himselfe in the end set them so on fire with
his reproachfull and injurious words, upbrayding them with their
pusilanimitie and faint-heartednesse, and with the regret of their
ladies, banquettings and sensualities, which they had left at Rome,
that he put them into heart againe, which no perswasions or other
meanes could doe before; and thereby drew them, whom nought could have
driven, to fight and fall upon him.  And verily, when they are
injuries that touch a man to the quicke, they shall easily urge him,
who was very backward to fight for his Kings quarrel, to be very
forward in his owne cause or interest.  If a man but consider of what
consequence the preservation and importance the safetie of a generall
is in an Armie, and how the enemies chiefest ayme is at the fairest
marke, which is the head, from which all other depend, it seemeth that
that counsell cannot be doubted of, which by sundrie great Chieftaines
we have seene put in practice, which is, in the beginning of the
fight, or in the fury of the battell, to disguise
themselves. Notwithstanding the inconvenience a man may by this meanes
incurre, is no lesse than that mischiefe which a man seeketh to avoid:
For the Captaine being unseene and unknowne of his souldiers, the
courage they take by his example, and the heart they keep by his
presence, is therewithall impaired and dimmished; and losing the
knowne ensignes and accustomed markes of their Leader, they either
deem him dead, or, dispairing of any good success, to be fled.  And
touching experience, we sometimes see it to favor the one and
sometimes the other partie.  The accident of Pirrhus in the battell he
had against the Consull Levinus in Italie serveth us for both uses:
For, by concealing himselfe under the armes of Demagacles, and arming
him with his owne indeed he saved his life, but was in great danger to
fall into the other mischiefe, and lose the day.  Alexander, Caesar,
Lucullus, loved (at what time they were to enter fight) to arme and
attire themselves with the richest armes, and garish clothes they had,
and of particular bright-shining colours.  Agis, Agesilaus, and that
great Gilippus, contrairie, would ever goe to warres meanely
accoutred, and without any imperiall ornament. Among other reproaches
that great Pompey is charged withall in the battell of Pharsalia, this
is one speciall, that he idlely lingred with his Armie, expecting what
his enemie would attempt; forasmuch as that (I will here borrow the
very words of Plutarke, which are of more consequence than mine)
weakneth the violence that running giveth the first bIowes, and
therewithall removeth the charging of the Combatants one against
another, which more than any other thing is wont to fill them with
fury and impetuosity, when with vehemence they come to enter-shocke
one another, augmenting their courage by the crie and running; and in
a manner alayeth and quaileth the heat of Souldiers: Loe-here what he
saith concerning this.  But had Caesar lost, who might not also have
said, that contrariwise the strongest and firmest situation is that
wherein a man keeps his stand without budginge and that who is settled
in his march, closing, and against any time of need, sparing his
strength in himselfe, hath a great advantage against him that is in
motion and disordered; and that running hath already consumed part of
his breath?  Moreover, that an armie being a body composed of so many
several parts, it is impossible it should in such furie advance it
selfe with so just a match, and proportioned a motion, and not breake
and dis-ranke, or at least alter her ordinance, and that the nimblest
be not grapling before his fellowes may helpe him.  In that drearie
battell of the two Persian brethren, Clearchus the Lacedemonian, who
commanded the Graecians that followed, Cyrus his faction, let them
faine and gently without any halt-making to their charges, but when he
came within fifty paces of his enemies he had them with all speed to
run unto it; hoping by the shortnesse of the distance to manage their
order and direct their breath; in the meane time giving them the
advantage of the impetuositie, both for their bodies and for their
shooting-armes.  Others have ordered this doubt in their army after
this manner: If your enemies headlong run upon you, stay for them and
bouge not: If they without stirring stay for you, run with furie upon
them.  In the passage which the Emperor Charles the fifth made into
Provence, our King Francis the first stood a good while upon this
choice; whether it was best, by way of prevention, to go and meet with
him in Italie, or to stay his comming into France.  And albeit he
considered what an advantage it is for one to preserve his house from
the troubles and mischiefes that warre brings with it, to the end
that, possessing her whole strength, it may continually in all times
of need store him with money, and supplie him with all other helps;
and considering how the necessity of direfull warre doth daily enforce
a Genemll to make spoile of goods, and waste the Countrie, which
cannot well be done in our owne goods and countrie: and that the
countriman doth not as patiently indure this ravage at his friends
hands as at his enemies, so as seditions may ensue amongst our onlie
factions, and troubles amongst our friends: That license to rob and
spoile, which in his countrie may not be tolerated, is a great
furtherance in a Souldier, and makes him the more willing to endure
the miseries and toylings that follow warre: And what a hard matter it
is to keep the Souldier in office and heart, who hath no other hope of
profit but his bare pay, and is so neere his wife, his children, his
friends, and his home: That he who layeth the cloth is ever put to the
greatest charges: That there is more pleasure in assailing than in
defending: And that the apprehension of a battell lost in our owne
home and entrailes is so violent, that it may easily shake the whole
frame and distemper the whole body, seeing there is no passion so
contagious as that of fear nor so easie apprehended and taken a-trust,
or doth more furiously possesse all parts of man: And that the Cities
or Townes, which have either heard the hustling noise of the tempest
or seene the sparkles of this all-consuming fire at their gates, or
have perhaps received their Captaines wounded, their Citizens pursued,
and their souldiers spoiled, and all out of breath, if they be not
more than obstinately constant, it is a thousand to one if in that
brunt of furie they doe not headlong cast themselves into some
desperate resolution.  Yet did he conclude and chuse this resolve for
the best: First to revoke his forces he had beyond the Mountaines in
Italie, and so stay his enemies approaches.  For he might, on the
contrairie part, imagine that being in his owne countrie, and amidst
good freinds, he had the better leisure io re-enforce his decayed
forces, and more opportunitie to strengthen Townes, to munite Castles,
to store Rivers with all necessaries they wanted, and to keepe all
passages at his devotion, which done, all the wayes should be open for
him, and might by them have all manner of victuals, money, and other
habilements of warre brought him in safety, and without convoy: that
he should have his subjects so much the more affectionate unto him, by
how much nearer they should see the danger: That having so many
Cities, Townes, Holds, Castles, and Barres for his securitie, he might
at all times, according to opportunitie and advantage, appoint and
give Law unto the fight: And if he were pleased to temporize, whilest
he took his ease, kept his forces whole, and maintained himself in
safetie, he might see his enemie consume and waste himselfs by the
difficulties which daily must necessarily assault, environ, and combat
him, as he who should be engaged in an enemie-countrie and foe-land,
where he should have nothing, nor meet with any thing, either before
or behind him, or of any side, that did not offer him continnall
warre: no way nor meanes to refresh, to ease or give his armie
elbow-roome, if any sicknesse or contagion should come amongst his
men; nor shelter to lodge his hurt and maymed Souldiers: where neither
monie, munition, nor victuals might come unto him, but at the swords
point; where he should never have leasure to take any rest or breath;
where he should have no knowledge of places, passages, woods, foords,
rivers, or countrie, that might defend him from ambuscados or
surprises: And if he should unfortunately chance to lose a battell, no
hope to save, or meanes to reunite the reliques of his forces.  And
there want not examples to strengthen both sides.  Scipio found it
better for him to invade his enemies countrie of Affrica, than to
defend his owne, and fight with him in Italie, where he was, wherein
he had good successe.  But contrariwise, Hanniball in the same warre
wrought his owne overthrow, by leaving the conquest of a forraine
countrie for to goe and defend his owne, The Athenians having left the
enemie in their owne land for to passe into Sicilie, had very ill
successe, and were much contraried by fortune: whereas Agathocles,
King of Siracusa, prospered and was favoured by her, what time he
passed into Affrica, and left the warre on foot in his owne countrie.
And we are accustomed to say with some show of reason, that especially
in matters of warre the events depend (for the greatest part) on
fortune: which seldome will yeeld, or never subject her selfe unto our
discourse or wisdome, as say these ensuing verses:

  Et male consultis pretium est, prudentia fallax

  Nec fortuna probat causas sequiturque merentes

  Sed vaga per cunctos nullo discrimine fertur

  Scilicet est aliud quod nos cogatque regatqu

  Majus, et in proprias ducat mortalia leges,/1


  'Tis best for ill advis'd, wisdome may faile

  Fortune proves not the cause that should prevaile,

  But here and there without respect doth saile

  A higher power forsooth us over-drawes

  And mortall states guides with immortall lawes.

     But if it be well taken, it seemeth that our counsels and
     deliberations doe as much depend of her; and that fortune doth
     also engage our discourses and consultations in her trouble and
     uncertaintie. 'We reason rashly, and discourse at random,' saith
     Timeus in Plato: 'for even as we, so have our discourses great
     participation with the temeritie of hazard.'

----- 1 MANIL.  Astr. 1. iv. 95.

CHAPTER 1.XLVIII+ OF STEEDS, CALLED IN FRENCH DESTRIERS

BEHOLD, I am now become a Gramarian, I, who never learnt tongue but by
way of roat, and that yet know not what either Adjective, Conjunctions
or Ablative meaneth.  As far as I remember, I have sometimes had
certaine horses which they call Funales, or Dextrarios, which on the
right hand were led by, as spare horses, to take them fresh at any
time of need and thence it commeth that we call horses of service
Destriers; and our ancient Romanes doe ordinarily say to Adexter, in
steed of to accompanie.  They also called Desultorios equos certaine
horses that were so taught, that mainly-running with all the speed
they had, joyning sides to one another, without either bridle or
saddle, the Roman gentlemen, armed at all assays, in the middest of
their running race would cast and recast themselves from one to
another horse.  The Numidian men at armes were wont to have a second
spare-horse led by hand, that in the greatest furie of the battell
they might shift and change horse: Quibus, desultorum in modum, binos
trahentibus equos, inter acerrimam saepe pugnam in recentem equum ex
fesso armatis transsultare, mos erat.  Tanta velocitas ipsis, tamque
docile equorum genus:/1 "Whose manner was as if they had beene
vaulters, leading two horses with them in armour to leap from their
tired horse to the fresh- one, even in the hottest of the fight.  So
great agilitie was in themselves, and so apt to be taught was the race
of their horses.' There are many horses found that are taught to helpe

----- 1 LIV.  Bel.  Pun.  Dec. iii. 1. iii.

their master, to run upon any man shall offer to draw a naked sword
upon them; furiously to leap upon any man, both with feet to strike
and with teeth to bite, that shall affront them; but that for the most
part they rather hurt their friends than their enemies.  Considering
also, that if they once be grapled, you cannot easily take them off
and you must needs stand to the mercie of their combat.  Artibus
Generall of the Persian armie, had very ill luck to be mounted upon a
horse fashioned in this schoole, at what time he fought man to man
against Onesilus, King of Salamis; for he was the cause of his death,
by reason the shieldbearer or squire of Onesilus cut him with a
faulchon betweene the two shoulders, even as he was leaping upon his
master.  And if that which the Italians report be true, that in the
battell of Fornovo, King Charles his horse, with kicking, winching,
and flying, rid both his master and himselfe from the enemies that
encompast him, to dismount or kill him, and without that, he had beene
lost: He committed himselfe to a great hazard, and scap't a narrow
scowring.  The Mammalukes boast that they have the nimblest and
readiest horses of any men at armes in the world.  That both by nature
they are instructed to discerne, and by custome taught to distinguish
their enemie, on whom they must leepe and wince with feet and bite
with teeth, according to the voice their master speaketh or rider
giveth them.  And are likewise taught to take up from the ground,
lances, darts, or any other weapons with their mouths, and as he
commandeth to present them to their rider.  It is said of Caesar, and
of Pompey the Great that amongst their many other excellent qualities,
they were also most cunning and perfect horsemen; and namely of
Caesar, that in his youth being mounted upon a horse, and without any
bridle, he made him run a fall cariere, make a sodaine stop, and with
his hands behind his backe, performe what ever can be expected of an
excellent ready horse. And even as nature was pleased to make both him
and Alexander two mathblesse miracles in militarie pro- fession, so
would you say she hath also endevoured, yea, enforced herselfe to arme
them extraordinarily; For all men know that Alexanders horse, called
Bucephalus, had a head shaped like unto that of a bull; that he
suffered no man to get-on and sit him but his master; that none could
weald and manage him but he; what honours were done him after his
death all know, for he had a Citie erected in his name.  Caesar
likewise had another who had his fore-feet like unto a mans, with
hoofs cloven in forme of fingers, who could never he handled, drest,
or mounted but by Caesar, who when he died dedicated his image to the
Goddesse Venus.  If I be once on horse- backe, I alight very
unwillingly; for it is the seat I like best, whether I be sound or
sicke.  Plato commendeth it to be availefull for health: and Plinie
affirmeth the same to be healthfull for the stomacke and for the
joynts.  And sithence we be falne into this subject, let us a little
follow it I pray you.  We read of a law in Xenophon, by which all men
that either had or were able to keepe a horse were expresly forbidden
to travell and goe a foot.  Trogus and Iustinus report that the
Parthians were not only accustomed to warre on horse-backe, but
also. to dispatch all their businesse, and negotiate their affaires,
both publike and privat; as to bargaine, to buy, to sell, to parly, to
meet, to entertaine one another, and to converse and walke together;
and that the chiefest difference betweene free men and servants
amongst them is that the first ever ride, and the other goe alwaies on
foot: an institution first devised by King Cyrus.  There are many
examples in the Romane historie,; (and Suetonius doth more
particularly note it in Caesar) of Captaines that commanded their
horsemen to alight whensoever by occasion they should be urged unto
it, thereby to remove all manner of hope from their Souldiers to save
themselves by flight, and for the advantage they hoped for in this
manner of fight: Quo haud dubie superat Romanus:/1 'Wherein undantedly
the Romane is superiour to all,'

----- 1 LIV.  Dec. i. 1. iii. et vii.

saith Titus Livius: yet shall we see that the first provision and
chiefe meanes they used to bridle rebellion amongst their new
conquered nations was to deprive them of all armes and horses.
Therefore finde we so often in Caesar: Arma proferri, jumenta produci,
obsides dari jubat:/1 'He commands all their armour should be brought
forth, all their cattell should be driven out, and hostages should be
delivered.' The great Turke doth not permit, at this day, any
Christian or Jew to have or keepe any horse for himselfe throughout
all his large empire.  Our ancestors, and especially at what time we
had warres with the English, in all solemne combats or set battles,
would (for the most part) alight from their horses, and fight on foot,
because they would not adventure to hazard so precious a thing as
their honour and life, but on the trust of their owne proper strength
and vigour of their undanted courage, and confidence of their limbs.
Let Chrisanthes in Xenophon say what be pleaseth: whosoever fighteth
on horse- backe engageth his valour and hazardeth his fortune on that
of his horse; his hurts, his stumbling, his death, drawes your life
and fortune into consequence, if he chance to startle or be afraid,
then are you induced to doubt or feare: if to leape forward, then to
become rash and fond-hardy: if he want a good mouth or a timely
spurre, your honour is bound to answer for it.  And therefore doe not
I finde it strange, that those combats were more firme and furious
than those which now we see foughten on horse-backe.

         ----- cedebant pariter, pariterque rueban

  Victores, victique, neque his fuga nota, neque illis.


  The victors and the vanquisht both togethe

  Gave backe, came on: the flight was knowne in neither.

Their battels are seene much better compact and contrived: they are
now but bickerings and routs: Primus clamor atque impetus rem
decernit. 'The first shout and shocke makes an end of the matter.' And

----- 1 CAES.  Comment. 1. vii. 2 VIRG.  Aen. 1. x. 576.

the thing we call to help us, and keepe us company in so great and
hazardous an adventure, ought, as much as possible may be, lie still
in our disposition and absolute power.  As I would counsell a
gentleman to chuse the shortest weapons, and such as he may best
assure himselfe of: It is most apparant that a man may better assure
himselfe of a sword he holdeth in his hand, than of a bullet shot out
of a pistoll, to which belong so many severall parts, as powder,
stone, locke, snap-hanse, harrell, stocke, scowring-peece, and many
others, whereof if the least faile, or chanee to breake, and be
distempered, it is able to overthrow, to hazard, or miscarry your
fortune. Seldome doth that blow come or light on the marke it is aymed
at, which the ayre doth carry.

  Et quo ferre velint permittere vulnera ventis

  Ensis habet vires et gens guaecunque virorum est,

  Bella gerit gladius./1


  Giving windes leave to give wounds as they list

  But swords have strength, and right men never mist

  With sword t'assult, and with sword to resist.

But concerning that weapon, I shall more amply speake of it where I
will make a comparison betweene ancient and moderne armes: And except
the astonishment and frighting of the eare, which nowadaies is growne
so familiar amongst men, that none doth greatly feare it; I think it
to be a weapon of small effect, and hope to see the use of it
abolished.  That wherewith the Italians were wont to throw with fire
in it, was more frightfull and terrour-moving. They were accustomed to
name a kinde of javelin, Phalarica, armed at one end with an yron pike
of three foot long, that it might pierce an armed man through, which
lying in the field they used to lanch or hurle with the hand, and
sometimes to shoot out of certaine engines, for to defend besieged
places: the staffe whereof being wreath'd about with hemp or flax, all
pitched and oiled over, flying in the ayre, would soone be set afire,
and

----- 1 LUCAN. 1.  Viii, 384.

lighting upon any body or target, deprived the partie hit therewith of
all use of weapons or limbs: Me thinkes neverthelesse, that comming to
grapple, it might as well hinder the assailant as trouble the
assailed, and that the ground strewed with such burning truncheons,
might in a pell-inell confusion produce a common incommoditie.

         ----- magnum stridens contorta phalarica veni

  Fulminis acta modo./1


  With monstrous buzzing came a fire-dart thirled.

  As if a thunder-bolt had there beene whirled.

They had also other means, to the use of which custome enured them,
and that by reason of inexperience seeme incredible to us: wherewith
they supplied the defect of our powder and bullets.  They with such
fury darted their Piles, and with such force hurled their javelins,
that they often pierced two targets and two armed men through, as it
were with a spit.  They hit as sure and as farre with their slings as
with any other shot.  Saxis globosis funda, mare apertum
incessentes. . . coronas modici circuli magno ex intervallo loci
assueti trajicere: non capita modo hostium vulnerabant, sed quem locum
destinassent:/2 'While they were boyes, with round stones in a sling,
making ducks and drakes upon the sea, they accustomed to cast through
round marks of small compasse a great distance off: whereby they not
only hit and hurt the heads of their enemies; but woufd strike any
place they aymed at.' Their battering or murthering peeces represented
as well the effect as the clattering and thundering noise of ours: ad
ictus maenium cum terribili sonitu editos, pavor el trepidatio cepit;
'At the batterie of the walles made with a terrible noise, feare and
trembling began to attach them within.' The Gaules, our ancient
forefathers in Asia, hated mortally such treacherous and flying
weapons, as they that were taught to fight hand to hand, and with more
courage.' Non tam patentibus plagis moventur, - ubi latior quam

----- 1 VIRG.  AEn. 1. ix. 705. 2 LIV.  Dec. iv. 1. viii.

altior plaga est, etiam gloriosius se pugnare putant; iidem quum
     aculeus sagittae, aut glandis abdita, introrsus tenui vulnere in
     speciem urit; tum in rabiem et pudorem tam parvae perimentis
     pestis versi, prosternunt corpora humi:/1 'They are not so much
     moved with wide gashes, where the wound is more broad than it is
     deepe, there they thinke that they fight with more bravery; but
     when the sting of an arrow or a bullet, with a small wound to
     shew, gals them inwardly, then falling into rage and shame that
     so slight a hurt should kill them, they cast their bodies on the
     ground.'  A model or picture very neere unto an harquebusada. The
     ten thousand Grecians in their long-lingering and farre-famous
     retreat, encountered with a certain nation that exceedingly much
     endomaged them with stiffe, strong, and great blowes, and so long
     arrowes, that taking them up, they might throw them after the
     manner of a dart, and with them pierce a target and an armed man
     thorow and thorow.  The engines which Dionysius invented in
     Siracusa, to shoot and cast mightie big arrowes, or rather
     timber- peaces, and huge-great stones, so farre and with such
     force, did greatly represent and come very near our moderne
     invention.  We may not also forget the pleasant seat which one
     named Master Peter Pol, doctor in divinitie, used to sit upon his
     mule, who, as Monstrelet reporteth, was wont to ride up and downe
     the streets of Paris, ever sitting sideling, as women use.  He
     also saith in another place, that the Gascoines had certaine
     horses, so fierce and terrible, taught to turne and stop suddenly
     in running, whereat the French, the Piccards, the Flemmings, and
     Brabantins (as they who were never accustomed to see the like)
     were greatly amazed, and thought it a wonder: I use his very
     words.  Caesar, speaking of those of Swethen, saithe 'In any
     skirmish or fight on horsebacke, they often alight to combat on
     foot, having so trained and taught their horses, that so long as
     the fight lasteth they never bouge from their masters side, that
     if need require, they may suddenly

----- 1 LIV.  Dec. iv. 1. viii.

mount up againe: and according to their naturall custome, there is
nothing accounted more base or vile than to use saddles or bardels,
and they greatly contemne and scorne such as use them: So that a few
of them feare not to encounter with a troupe farre exceeding them in
number.  That which I have other times wondered at, to see a horse
fashioned and taught, that a man having but a wand in his hand, and
his bridle loose hanging over his eares, might at his pleasure manage,
and make him turne, stop, run, carrie, trot, gallop, and whatever else
may be expected of all excellent ready horse, was common amongst the
Massilians, who never used either bridle or saddle.

  Et gens que nudo residens Massilia dorso,

  Ora levi flectit, froenorum nescia, virga./1


  Massilian horsemen on bare horse-backe sit

  Manage with light rod, without reynes or bit.


  Et Numidae infroeni cingunt./2


  Numidians who their horses ride

  Without bit, round about us bide.

Equi sine froenis, deformis ipse cursus rigida cervice et extento
capite currentiam: 'the horses being without bridles, their course is
ill favoured, they running with a stiffe necke, and outstretcht head
(like a roasted Pigge:)' Alphonsus, King of Spaine that first
established the order of Knights called the order of the Bend or
skarfe, amongst other rules devised this one, that none of them, upon
paine to forfeit a marke of silver for every time offending, should
ever ride either mule or mulet; as I lately read in Guevaras%
epistles, of which. whosoever called them his golden epistles gave a
judgment farre different from mine.  The Courtier% saith, 'That before
his time it was counted a great shame in a gentleman to be seen riding
upon a mule:' Whereas the Abyssines are of a contrarie opinion, who
accordingly as they are advanced to places of honour or dignitie about
their Prince, called

----- 1 LUCAN. 1, iv. 681. 1 VIRG.  AEn. 1. iv. 41.

Prestem-John, so do they more and more affect, in signe of pompe and
state, to ride upon large-great mules.  Xenophon reporteth that the
Assirians were ever wont to keepe their horses fast-tied in fetters or
gyves, and ever in the stable, they were so wilde and furious.  And
for that they required so much time to unshackle, and to harnish them
(lest protracting of so long time might, if they should chance at
unawares, and being unready, to be surprised by their enemies,
endomage them) they never took up their quarter in any place except it
were well dyked and intrenched.  His Cirus, whom he maketh so cunning
in horsemanship, did always keepe his horses at a certaine stint, and
would never suffer them to have any meat before they had deserved the
same by the sweat of some exercise.  If the Scithians in time of warre
chanced to be brought to any necessitie of victuals, the readiest
remedy they had was to let their horses bloud, and therewithall
quenched their thirst and nourished themselves.

  Venit et epoto Sarmata pastus equo./1


  The Scithian also came, who strangely feede

  On drinking out his horse (or that hee bleedes).

Those of Crotto being hardly besieged by Metellus, were reduced to so
hard a pinch and strait necessitie of all manner of other beverage,
that they were forced to drinke the stale or urine of their horses.
To verifie how much better cheape the Turkes doe both levie, conduct,
and maintaine their armies than we Christians doe, they report that
besides their souldiers never drinke any thing but water, and feed on
nothing but rice and drie salt flesh, which they reduce into a kinde
of powder (whereof every private man doth commonly carry so much about
him as will serve for a months provision), and for a shift will live a
long time with the bloud of their horses, wherein they use to put a
certaine quantitie of salt, as the Tartars and Moskovites doe.  These
new discovered people of the Indies, when the Spaniards came first
amongst them, esteemed that

----- 1 MART.  Spect. iii. 4.

as well men as horses were either gods or creatures far beyond and
excelling their nature in nobilitie.  Some of which, after they were
vanquished by them, comming to sue for peace and beg pardon at their
hands, to whom they brought presents of gold and such viand's as their
countrie yeelded, omitted not to bring the same and as much unto their
horses, and with as solemne oration as they had made unto men, taking
their neighings as a language of truce and composition.  In the nether
Indies the chiefe and royallest honour was anciently wont to be to
ride upon an elephant; the second to goe in coaches drawne with foure
horses; the third to ride upon a camell; the last and basest was to be
carried or drawne by one horse alone.  Some of our moderne writers
report to have seene some countries in that climate where the people
ride oxen, with packe-saddles, stirrops, and bridles, by which they
were carried very easily.  Quintus Fabius Maximus Rutilianus, warring
against the Samnites, and seeing that his horsemen in three or foure
charges they gave had missed to breake and run through his enemies
battalion, at last resolved thus, that they should all unbridle their
horses, and with maine force of sharpe spurres pricke and broach them;
which done, the horses, as enraged, took such a running thorow, and
athwart the enemies camp, armes and men, that nought was able to
resist them, and with such a furie that by opening, shouldering, and
overthrowing the battalion, they made way for his infanterie, which
there committed a most bloody slaughter, and obtained a notable
victorie.  The like was commanded and effected by Quintus Fulvius
Flaccus against the Celtiberians: Id cum majore vi equorum facietis,
si effraenatos in hostes equos immittitis; quod staepe Romanos equites
cum laude fecisse sua, memoriae proditum est.  Detractisque fraenis
bis ultro citroque cum magna strage hostium, infractis omnibus hastis,
transcurrerunt:/2 'That shall you doe with more violence of horse if
you force your horse unbridled on the enemie, which it is

----- 1 LIV.  Dec. iv. 1. x.

recorded the Roman horsemen have often performed with great proofe and
     praise.  So pulling off the bridles they twice ran through
     forward and backe againe with great slaughter of the enemie, all
     their launces broken.'  The Duke of Moscovie did anciently owe
     this reverence unto the Tartars, at what time soever they sent
     any Ambassadors to him, that he must goe meet them on foot, and
     present them with a goblet full of mares-milke (a drinke counted
     very delicious amongst them) which whilst they were drinking, if
     any drop chanced to be spilt upon their horses haires, he was by
     dutie hound to licke the same up with his tongue.  The armie
     which the Emperor Bajazeth had sent into Russia. la was
     overwhelmed by so horrible a tempest of snow that to find some
     shelter, and to save themselves from the extremitie of the cold,
     many advised to kill and unpanch their horses and enter into
     their panches to enjoy and find some ease by that vitall beat.
     Bajazeth after that bloudy and tragical conflict wherein he was
     overthrowne by the Scithian Tamburlane in seeking to escape, had
     no doubt saved himselfe by the swiftnesse of an Arabian mare on
     which he was mounted that day, if unluckily he had not been
     forced to let her drinke her fill in passing over a river, which
     made her so faint and floundered that he was easily overtaken and
     apprehended by those that pursued him. The common saying is, that
     to let a horse stale after a full cariere doth take downe his
     speed, but I would never had thought that drinking had done it,
     but rather strengthened and heartned him.  Croesus passing
     alongst the citie of Sardis found certaine thickets, wherein were
     great store of snakes and serpents, on which his horses fed very
     hungerly, which thing, as Herodotus saith, was an ill-boding
     prodigy unto his affaires.  We call him an entire horse that hath
     his full maine and whole eares, and which in shew, or at a
     muster, doth not exceed others.  The Lacedemonians having
     defeated the Athenians in Sicilie, returning in great pompe and
     glory from the victorie into the citie of Siracusa, among other
     bravadoes of theirs, caused such horses as they had taken from
     their enemies to be shorne all over, and so led them in triumph.
     Alexander fought with a nation called Dahas, where they went to
     warre two and two, all armed, upon one horse, but when they come
     to combat one must alight, and so successively one fought on foot
     and the ether on horsebacke, each in his turne one after another.
     I am perswaded that in respect of sufficiencie, of comlinesse,
     and of grace on horseback no nation goeth beyond us.  A good
     horse-man (speaking according to our phrase) seemeth rather to
     respect an undismayed courage than an affected clean
     seat. {PlainDealer+} The man most skilfull, best and
     surest-fitting, comeliest-graced, and nimblest- handed, to sit,
     to ride, and mannage a horse cunningly that ever I knew, and that
     best pleased my humor, was Monsieur de Carnavalet, who was Master
     of the Horse unto our King Henry the second.  I have seene a man
     take his full cariere, standing boult up-right on both his feet
     on the saddle, leap downe to the ground from it, and turning
     backe take off the saddle, and presently set it on againe as fast
     as ever it was, and then leap-into it againe, and al this did he
     whilst his horse was running as fast as might be with his bridle
     on his necke.  I have also seene him ride over a bonnet or cap,
     and being gone a good distance from it, with his bow shooting
     backward, to sticke many arrowes in the same; then sitting still
     in the saddle to take up any thing from the ground, to set one
     foot to the ground and keepe the other in the stirrop, and
     continually running doe a thousand such tumbling and apish
     tricks, wherewith got his living.  There have in my time two men
     beene seene in Constantinople, both at once upon one horse, and
     who in his speediest running would by turnes, first one and then
     another, leape downe to the ground and then into the saddle
     againe, the one still taking the others place.  And another who
     only with teeth, and without the helpe of any hand, would bridle,
     currie, rub, dresse, saddle, girt, and harnish his horse. Another
     that betweene two horses, and both saddled, standing upright with
     one foot in the one and the second in the other, did beare
     another man on his armes standing upright, run a full speedy
     course, and the uppermost to shoot and hit any marke with his
     arrowes.  Divers have beene seene who, standing on their heads
     and with their legs ourstretched aloft, having many
     sharp. pointed cimitaries fastened round about the saddle, to
     gallop at full speed.  While I was a young lad, I saw the Prince
     of Sulmona at Naples manage a young, a rough and fierce horse,
     and shew all manner of horsemanship; to hold testons or reals
     under his knees and toes so fast as if they had beene nayled
     there, and all to shew his sure, steady, and unmoveable sitting.

CHAPTER 1.XLIX+ OF ANCIENT CUSTOMES

I WOULD willingly excuse our people for having no other patterne or
rule of perfection but his owne customes, his owne fashions:
{culture_binding+} for it is a common vice, not only in the vulgar
sort, but as it were in all men, to bend their ayme and frame their
thoughts unto the fashions wherein they were borne.  I am pleased when
he shall See Fabricus or Laelius, who, because they are neither
attired nor fashioned according to our manner, that he condemne their
countenance to be strange and their cariage barbarous. But I bewaile
his particular indiscretion, in that he suffereth himselfe io be so
blinded and deceived by the authoritie of present custome, and that if
custome pleaseth he is ready to change opinion and varie advice, every
moneth, nay every day, and judgeth so diversly of himselfe.  When he
wore short-wasted doublets, and but little lower than his breast, he
would maintaine by militant reasons that the waste was in his right
place: but when not long after he came to weare them so long- wasted,
yea almost so low as his privates, than began he to condemne the
former fashion, as fond, intolerable and deformed; and to commend the
latter as comely, handsome, and commendable.  A new fashion of apparel
creepeth no sooner into use but presently he blameth and dispraiseth
the old, and that with so earnest a resolution and universall a
consent, that you would say, 'it is some kind of madnesse or
selfe-fond humor that giddieth his understanding.' And forasmuch as
our changing or altering of fashion is so sudden and new-fangled, that
the inventions and new devices of all the tailors in the world cannot
so fast invent novelties, it must necessarily follow that neglected
and stale rejected fashions doe often come into credit and use agam:
And the latest and newest within a while after come to be outcast and
despised, and that one selfe-same judgment within the space of
fifteene or twentie yeares admitteth not only two or three different,
but also cleane contrarie opinions, with so light and incredible
inconstancie+, that any man would wonder at it.  There is no man so
suttle-crafty amongst us, that suffereth not himself to be enveigled
and over-reached by this contradiction, and that is not insensibly
dazeled both with his inward and externall eies.  I will heere
huddle-up some few ancient fashions that I remember: Some of them like
unto ours, othersome farre differing from them: To the end, that
having ever this continuall variation of humane things in our minde,
we may the better enlighten and confirme our transported judgment.
That manner of fight which we use now adaies with rapier and cloke,
was also used among the Romanes, as saith Caesar: Sinistras sagis
involvunt, gladiosque distringunt:/1 they wrap their left armes in
their clokes, and draw their swords.' We may to this day observe this
vice to be amongst us, and which we have taken from them, that is, to
stay such passengers as we meet by the way, and force them to tell us
who they are, whence they come, whither they goe, and to count it as
an injurie and cause of quarrell+ they refuse to answer our demand. In
Baths, which our forefathers used daily before meals, as ordinarily as
we use water to wash our hands, when first they came into them they
washed but their armes and legges, but afterward (which custome lasted
many afterages, and to this day continueth amongst divers nations of
the world) their whole body over with compounded and perfumed waters,
in such sort as they held it as a great testimonie of simplicitie+ to
wash themselves in pure and uncompounded water: Such as were most
delicate and effeminate were wont to perfume their

----- 1 CAES.  Bel.  Civ. 1. i.

whole bodies over and over, three or four times every day: And often
(as our French women have lately taken up) to picke and snip out the
haires of their fore-head, so they of all their body.

  Quod pectus, quod crura ubi, quod brachia vellis./1


  That you from breast, legges, armes, the hair

  Neatly pull off (to make them faire).

Although they had choice of ointments fit for the purpose.

  Psilotro nitet, aut arida latet abdita creta./2


  She shines with ointments that make haire to fall.

  Or with dry chalke she over-covers all.

They loved to lie soft, and on fine downe beds, aleaging lying on hard
mattresses as a signe of patience.  They fed lying on their beds,
neere after the manner of the Turks nowadaies,

  Inde thoro pater AEneas sic orsus ab alto./3


  Father AEneas thus gan say

  From stately couch where then he lay.

And it is reported of Cato Junior that after the battell of Pharsalia,
and that he began to mourne and bewaile the miserable state of the
common- wealth, and ill condition of publike affaires, he ever eat
sitting on the ground, following an austere, and observing a strict
kinde of life.  The Beso las manos was used as a signe of honour and
humilitie only towards great persons.  If friends met, after friendly
salutations they used to kisse one another, as the Venetians do at
this day.

  Gratatusque darem cum dulcibus oscula verbis./4


  Give her I would with greetings graced

  Kisses with sweet words enterlaced.

And in saluting or suing to any great man they touched his knees,
Pasicles the philosopher, brother

----- 1 MART. 1. ii.  Epigr. lxii. 1. 2 Ib. 1. vi.
Epigr. xciii. 9. [Martial wrote acida lata oblita creta.] 3 VIRG.
AEn. 1. ii. 2. 4 OVID.  Po nt. 1. iv.  El. ix. 13.  unto Crates,
comming to salute one, whereas he should have carried his hand to his
knee, carried the same unto his genitories: The partie saluted having
rudely pusht him away, 'What,' quoth he, 'is not that part yours as
well as the other?' Their manner of feeding was as ours, their fruit
last.  They were wont to wipe their tailes (this vaine superstition of
words must be left unto women) with a sponge, and that's the reason
why Spongia in Latine is counted an obscene word: which sponge was
ever tied to the end of a gaffe, as witnesseth the storie of him that
was carried to be devoured of the wild beasts before the people, who
desiring leave to go toe a privie before his death, and having no
other meanes to kill himselfe, thrust downe the sponge and staffe hee
found in the privie into his throte wherewith he choked himselfe.
Having ended the delights of nature, they were wont to wipe their
privities with perfumed wooll.

  At ubi nil faciam, sed lota memtula lana./1


  To thee no such thing will I brlng

  But with washt wooll another thing.

In every street of Rome were placed tubs and such other vessels, for
passengers to make water in.

  Pusi seape lacum propter, se dolia curta

  Somno devincti credunt extollere vestem./2


  Children asleepe oft thinke they take up al

  Neere to some pissing tub, some lake, some wall.

They used to break their fast, and nonchion between meals, and all
summer-time had men that sold snowe up and down the streets, wherewith
they refreshed their wines, of whom some were so daintie that all
winter long they used to put snow into their wine, not deeming it cold
enough.  Principall and noble men had their cup bearers, tasters,
carvers, and buffons to make them merry.  In Winter their viandes were
brought and set on the boord upon arches, as we use chafing dishes;
and had portable kitchens (of which

----- 1 MART. 1. xi.  Epig. li. 11. 2 LUCR. 1. iv. 1018.

THE FIRST BOOK <Mont1-389> I have seene some) wherein might be drawne
wheresoever one list a whole service and messe of meat.

  Has vobis epulas habete, lauti.

  Nos offendimur ambulante caena./1


  Take you daintie mouth'd such stirring feast

  With walking meales we are offended guests.

And in summer they often caused cold water (being carried through
pipes) to drill upon them as they sate in their dining chambers, or
lowe parlors, where in cisterns they kept store of fish alive, which
the by-standers might at their pleasure chuse and take with their
hands, and have it drest every man according to his fantasie.  Fish
hath ever had this privilege, as at this day it hath, that chiefe
gentlemen are pleased and have skill to dress it best: And to say
truth, the taste of fish is much more delicat and exquisit than that
of flesh, at least in mine.  But in all manner of magnificence,
delitiousnes, riotous gluttonie, inventions of voluptuoushes,
wantonnes, and sumptuositie, we truly endevour, as much as may be, to
equall and come neere them: For our will and taste is as much
corrupted as theirs, but our skill and sufficiencie is farre short of
them: Our wit is no more capable, and our strength no more able to
approach and match them in these vitious and blame-worthy parts than
in vertuous and commendable actions: For both procaede from a vigor of
spirit and farre-reaching wit, which, without comparison, was much
greater in them than now in us.  And mindes by how much more strong
and excellent they are, so much lesse facultie and means have they to
doe, either excellently well or notoriously ill. The chiefest aime
amongst them was a meane or mediocrity.  The foremost or last, in
writing or speaking, had no signification of preheminence or
greatness, as may evidently apeeare by their writings.  They would
familiarly and as soon say, Oppius and Caesar, as Caesar and Oppius;
and as indifferently I and thou, as thou and I.  And that's the reason
why I have heretofore

----- 1 MART. 1. vii.  Epig. xlvii. 5.

noted in the life of Flaminius, in our French Plutarke, a place where
it seemeth that the Author, speaking of the jealousie of glorie that
was between the Aetolians and the Romanes for the gaine of a battell
which they had obtained in common, maketh for the purpose, that in
Greeke songs the Aetolians were named before the Romans, except there
bee some Amphibology in the French words: for in that toung I reade
it.  When Ladies came unto stoves or hot-houses, they made it not
daintie to admit men into their companie, and to be washed, rubbed,
chafed, and annointed by the hands of their groomes and pages.

  Inguina succinctus nigra ubi servus alut

  Stat, quoties calidis nuda foveris aequis./1


  Your man, whose loynes blacke-lether girds, stands by,

  Whilst in warme water you starke-naked lie.

They also used to sprinkle themselves all over with certaine powders,
thereby to alay and represse all manner of filth or sweat.  The
ancient Gaules (saith Sidonius Apollinaris) wore their haire long
before, and all the hinder part of their head shaven, a fashion that
our wanton youths and effeminate gallants have lately renued, and in
this new-fangled and fond- doting age, brought up againe, with wearing
of long-dangling locks before.  The ancient Romans paid the water-men
their fare or due so soone as they came into the boat, whereas we pay
it when they set us on shore.

         ----- dum as exigitur, dum mula ligature

  Tota abit hora./2


  While they call for their fare, tie drawe-mule to,

  There runs away a full houre, if not two.

Women were wont to lie on the utmost side of the, bed, and therefore
was Caesar called Spondam Regis Nicomedis:/3 'King Nicomedes his beds
side.' They tooke breath while they were drinking, and used to baptise
or put water in their wines.

----- 1 MART. 1. ii.  Epig. xxxiv. 1. 2 HOR. 1. i.  Sat. v. 13. 3
SUET.  Jul. Caes. c. xlix.

The FIRST BOOKE <Mont1-391>

         ----- quis puer oci

  Restinguit ardentis falern

  Pocula praetereunte limpha?/1


  What boy of mine or thin

  Shall coole our cup of wine

  With running water fine?

Those cousening and minde-deceiving countenances of lakeis [l adies?]
were also amongst them.

  O Iane, a tergo quem nulla cicania pinsit

  Nec manus auriculas imitata est mobilis albas,

  Nec lingae quantum sitiet canis Appula tantum./2


  O Janus, whom behinde no Storks-bill doth deride,

  Nor nimble hand resembling mak'st ears white and wide,

  Nor so much tongue lil'd out as dogges with thirst ore-dride.

The Argian and Romane Ladies mourned in white, as our dames wont to
doe, and if I might be credited, and beare-sway amongst them, they
should continue it still.  But because there are many bookes that
treat of this argument, I will say no more of it.

----- 1 HOR. 1. ii.  Od. xi. 18. 2 PERS.  Sat. i. 88.

CHAPTER 1.L+ OF DEMOCRITUS AND HERACLITUS

JUDGEMENT is an instrument for all subjects, and medleth every where,
and therefore the Essayes I make of it, there is no maner of occasion
I seek not to employ therein.  If it be a subject I understand not my
selfe, therein I make triall of it, sounding afarre off the depth of
the ford, and finding the same over deepe for my reach, I keepe my
selfe on the shoare. And to acknowledge not to be able to wade through
is a part of its effect, yea of such whereof he vanteth
most. {objectivity+} If I light upon a vaine and idle subject, I
assaye to trie and endevour to see whether I may find a good ground to
worke upon, and matter to frame a body, and wherewith to build and
under-lay it.  Sometimes I addresse my judgement and contrive it to a
noble and out-worn subject, wherein is nothing found subsisting of
itselfe, the high way to it being so bare-trodden that it cannot march
but in other steps.  There he pleaseth himselfe in chusing the course
he thinkes best, and a thousand paths sometimes he saith, this or that
was best chosen.  I take my first Argument of fortune: All are alike
unto in's: And I never purpose to handle them throughly: For there is
nothing wherein I can perceive the full perfection: Which they doe not
that promise to shew it us.  Of a hundred parts and visages that every
thing hath, I take one, which sometimes I slightly rnne over, and
other times but cursorily glance at.  And yet other whilst I pinch it
to the quicke and give it a Stockade, not the widest, but the deepest
I can.  And for the most part I love to seize upon them by some
unwonted lustre.  I would adventure to treat and discourse of some
matter to the depth; knew I my selfe lesse, or were I deceived in mine
owne impuissance; scattering here one and there another word,
scantlings taken from their maine groundwork, disorderly dispersed
without any well-grounded designe and promise.  I am not bound to make
it good, nor without varying to keepe my selfe close-tied unto it;
whensoever it shall please me to yeeld my selfe to doubt, to
uncertaintie, and to my Mistris's forme, which is ignorance.  Each
motion sheweth and discovereth what we are.  The very same minde of
Caesar we see in directing, marshalling, and setting the battel of
Pharsalia, is likewise seene to order, dispose, and contrive idle,
trifling and amorous devices.  We judge of a horse not only by seeing
him ridden, and cunningly managed, but also by seeing him trot or
pace; yea, if we but looke upon him as he stands in the stable.
Amongst the functions of the soule, some are but meane and base.  He
that seeth her no further, can never know her thorowly.  And he that
seeth her march her naturall and simple pace, doth peradventure
observe her best.  The winds or passions take her most in her highest
pitch, seeing she entirely coucheth herselfe upon every matter, and
wholy therein exerciseth herselfe: and handleth but one at once, not
according to it, but according to herselfe.  Things severall in
themselves have peradventure weight, measure, and condition: But
inwardly, in us, she cuts it out for them, as she understandeth the
same herselfe.  Death+ is fearefull and ugly unto Cicero; wished for
and desired of Cato; and indifferent unto Socrates.  Health, wellfare,
conscience, authoritie, riches, glorie, beautie, and their contraries
are dispoyled at the entrance, and receive a new vesture at the soules
hand.  Yea, and what coulour she pleaseth: browne, bright, greene,
sad, or any hew else; sharpe or sweete, deepe or superficiall, and
what each of them pleaseth. For none of them did ever verifie their
stiles, their rules, or formes in common; each one severally is a
Queene in her owne estate.  Therefore let us take no more excuses from
externall qualities of things.  To us it belongeth to give our selves
accoumpt of it.  Our good and our evil hath no dependancy but from our
selves. Let us offer our vowes and offerings unto it, and not to
fortune+.  She hath no power over our manners.  Why should I not judge
of Alexander as I am sitting and drinking at table, and talking in
good company?  Or if hee were playing at Chesse, what string of his
wit doth not tone or harpe on this fond-childish and time-consuming
play?  I lothe and shun it, only because there is no sport enough in
it, and that in his recreation he is over serious with us, being
ashamed I must apply the attention therunto as might be imployed on
some good subject.  He was no more busied in levying his forces and
preparing for his glorious passage into India; nor this other in
disintangling and discovering of a passage whence dependeth the
well-fare and safety of mankind.  See how much our mind troubleth this
ridiculous ammuzing, if all her sinnewes bandy not.  How amply she
giveth every one Law in that to know and directly to judge of
himselfe.  I doe not mor universally view and feele my selfe in any
other posture.  What passion doth not exercise us therunto.  Choller,
spight, hatred, impatience, and vehement ambition to overcome, in a
matter wherein it were haply more excusable to be ambitious for to be
vanquished.  For a rare pre-excellence, and beyond the common reach,
in so frivolous a thing, is much mis-seeming a man of honour.  What I
say of this example may be spoken of all others.  Every parcell, every
occupation of a man, accuseth and sheweth him equal unto another.
Democritus and Heraclitus were two Philosophers, the first of which,
finding and deeming humane condition to be vaine and ridiculous, did
never walke abroad but with a laughing, scorneful and mocking
countenance: Whereas Heraclitus, taking pitie and compassion+ of the
very same condition of ours, was continually seene with a sad,
mournfull, and heavie cheere, and with teares trickling downe his
blubbered eyes.

         ----- Alte

  Ridebat quoties a limine moverat unu

  Protuleratque pedem, flebat contrarius alter,/1


  One from his doore, his foote no sooner past

  But straight he taught; the other wept as fast.

I like the first humor best, not because it is more pleasing to laugh
than to weepe; but for it is more disdainfull, and doth more condemne
us than the other.  And me thinkes we can never bee sufficiently
despised according to our merit. {human_nature+} Bewailing and
commiseration are commixed with some estimation of the thing moaned
and wailed.  Things scorned and contemned are thought to be of no
worth.  I cannot be perswaded there can be so much ill lucke in us as
there is apparant vanitie, nor so much malice as sottishnesse.  We are
not so full of evil as of voydnesse and inanitie. We are not so
miserable as base and abject.  Even so Diogenes, who did nothing but
trifle, toy, and dally with himself, in rumbling and rowing of his
tub, and flurting at Alexander, accompting us but flies and bladders
puft with winde, was a more sharpe, a more bitter, and a more stinging
judge, and by consequence more just and fitting my humor than Timon+,
surnamed the hater of all mankinde.  For looke what a man hateth, the
same thing he takes to hart.  Timon wisht all evill might light on us:
He was passionate in desiring our ruine.  He shunned and loathed our
conversation as dangerous and wicked, and of a depraved nature:
Whereas the other so little regarded us, that we could neither trouble
nor alter him by our contagion; he forsooke our company, not for
feare, but for disdaine of our commerce: He never thought us capable
or sufficient to doe either good or evill.  Of the same stampe was the
answer of Statilius, to whom Brutus+ spake to win him to take part,
and adhere to the conspiracie against Caesar: He allowed the
enterprize to be very just, but disalowed of the men that should
performe the same, as unworthy that any man would put himself in any
adventure for them: Con-

----- 1 JUVEN.  Sat. x. 28.

formable to the discipline of Hegesias, who said, 'That a man ought
never to doe anything but for himself;' forasmuch as he alone is
worthy to have any action performed for him: and to that of Theodorus,
'who thought it an injustice that a wise man would in any case hazard
himselfe for the good and benefit of his countrie, or to endanger his
wisdome for fooles.' Our owne condition is as ridiculous as risible,
as much to be laught at as able to laugh.

CHAPTER 1.LI+ OF THE VANITIE OF WORDS

A RHETORICIAN of ancient times said that his trade was to make small
things appeare and seeme great.  It is a shoemaker that can make great
shooes for a little foot.  Had hee lived in Sparta he had doubtlesse
been well whipped for professing a false, a couzening and deceitful
art.{PlainDealer+} And I thinke Archidamus, King of that Citie, did
not without astonishment listen unto the answer of Thucydides, of whom
he demanded whether he or Pericles was the strongest and nimblest
wrestler; whose answer was this, 'Your question, sir, is very hard to
be decided; for if in wrestling with him I give him a fall, with his
faire words he perswadeth those that saw him on the ground that he
never fell, and so gets the victorie.' Those that maske and paint
women commit not so foule a fault; for it is no great losse, though a
man see them not, as they were naturally borne and unpainted: Whereas
these profess to deceive and beguile not of eies, but our judgement,
and to bastardize and corrupt the offence of things.  Those
common-wealths that have maintained themselves in a regular formal,
and well governed estate, as that of Creete and Lacedemon, did never
make any great esteeme of orators.  Ariston did wisely define
Rhetorike 'to be a Science to perswade the vulgar people:' Socrates
and Plato 'to be an Art to deceive and flatter.' And those which denie
it in the generall description, doe every where in their precepts
verify the same.  The Mahomedans, by reason of its inutilitie, forbid
the teaching of it to their children.  And the Athenians, perceiving
how per- nicious the profession and use thereof was, and of what
credit in their Citie, ordained that their principall part, which is
to move affections, should be dismissed and taken away, together with
all exordiums and perorations. It is an instrument devised to busie,
to manage, and to agitate a vulgar and disordered multitude; and is an
implement to be employed but about distempered and sicke mindes, as
Physicke about crazed bodies.  And those where eithjer the vulgar, the
ignorant, or the generalitie have had all power, as that of Rhodes,
those of Athens, and that of Rome, and where things have ever been in
continuall disturbance and uproar, thither have Orators and the
professors of that Art flocked.  And verily, if it be well looked
into, you shall finde very few men in those common-wealths that
without helpe of eloquence have attained to any worthy estimation and
credit: Pompey, Caesar, Crassus, Lucullus, Lentulus, Metellus, have
thence taken their greatest stay and furtherance, whereby they have
ascended unto that height and greatnesse of authoritie whereunto they
at last attained, and against the opinion of better times have more
prevailed with words than with armes.  For L.  Volumnius, speaking
publikely in favour of the election which some had made of Quintus
Fabius and Publius Decius to be Consuls, saith thus: 'They are men
borne unto warre, of high spirits, of great performance, and able to
effect anything; but rude, simple, and unarted in the combat of
talking: minds truly consulare. {Brutus+} They only are good Pretors,
to do justice in the Citie (saith he), that are subtile, cautelous,
well-spoken, wily, and lip-wise.' Eloquence hath chiefly flourished in
Rome when the common-wealths affaires have beene in worst estate and
that the devouring Tempest+ of civill broyles, and intestine warres
did most agitate and turmoil them.  Even as a rancke, free and
nntained soyle, beareth the rankest and strongest weeds, whereby it
seemeth that those common weales which depend of an absolute Monarch,
have lesse need of it than others: For that foolishnesse and facilitie
which is found in the common multitude, and which doth subject the
same to be managed, perswaded, and led by the eares by the sweet,
alluring and sense-entrancing sound of this harmonie, without duly
weighing, knowing, or considering the trueth of things by force of
reason: This facilitie and easie yeelding, I say, is not so easily
found in one only ruler, and it is more easy to warrant him from the
impression of this poyson, by good institution and sound counsell.
There was never seene any notable or farre-renowned Orator to come out
of Macedon of Persia. What I have spoken of it hath beene upon the
subject of an Italian, whom I have lately entertained into my service,
who during the life of the whilom cardinall Caraffa served him in the
place of steward of his house. {Polonius+} Enquiring of his charge and
particular qualitie, he told me a long, formall and eloquent discourse
of the science or skill of epicurisme and gluttonie, with such an
Oratorie-gravitie and Magistrale countenance as if he had discoursed
of some high mysterious point of divinitie, wherein he hath very
methodically-decifred and distinguished sundrie differences of
appetites: First of that which a man hath fasting, then of that men
have after the first, the second, and third service.  The severall
meanes how sometimes to please it simply, and other times to sharpen
and provoke the same; the policie and rare invention of his sawces:
First, in general terms then particularizing the qualities and
severall operations of the ingredients, and their effects: The
difference of salades according to their distinct seasons; which must
be served in warme, and which cold: The manner how to dress, how to
adorne and embellish them, to make them more pleasing to the sight.
After that, he entred into a large and farre-fetcht narration touching
the true order and due method of service, full of goodly and important
considerations.

         ----- Nec minimo sane discrimine refert

  Quo gestu lepores, et quo gallina secetur./1

----- JUV.  Sat. v. 127.

  What grace we use, it makes small diff'rence, when

  We carve a Hare, or else breake up a Hen.

     And all that filled up and stuffed with rich magnificent words,
     well couched phrases, oratorie figures, and patheticall
     metaphors; yea such as learned men use and imploy in speaking of
     the government of an empire, which made me remember my man.

  Hoc salsum est, hoc adustum est, hoc lautum est parum,

  Illud recte, iterum sic memento, sedul

  Moneo quae possum pro mea sapientia

  Postremo tanquam in speculum, in patinas, Demea

  Inspicere jubeo, et moneo quid facto usus sit./1


  This dish is salt, this burnt, this not so fine,

  That is well done, doe so againe; Thus

  As my best wisdome serves, all things assigne.

  Lastly, sir, I command, they neatly prie

  On dishes, as a glasse

  And shew what needfull was.

Yet did those strict Grecians commend the order and disposition which
Paulus Emilius observed in the banquet he made them at his returne
from Macedon: But here I speake not of the effects, but of the words.
I know not whether they worke that in others which they doe in mee.
But when I heare our Architects mouth-out those big and ratling words
of Pilasters, Architraves, Cornixes, Frontispices, Corinthian and
Dorike works, and such like fustian-termes of theirs, I cannot let my
wandering imagination from a sodaine apprehension of Apollidonius his
pallace, and I find by, effect that they are the seely and decayed
peeces of my Kitchen-doore.  Doe but heare one pronounce Metonymia,
Metaphore, Allegory, Etimologie and other such trash-names of grammar,
would you not thinke they meant some forme of a rare and strange
language: They are titles and words that concerne your chamber-maids
tittle-tattle. It is a fopperie and cheating tricke, cousin-germane
unto this, to call the offices of our estate by the proud titles of
the ancient

----- 1 TER.  Adel. act iii. sc. 4, 62.

Romans, though they have no resemblance at all of charge, and lesse of
authoritie and power.  And this likewise, which in mine opinion will
one day remaine as a reproch unto our age, unworthily and undeservedly
to bestow on whom we list the most glorious surnames and loftiest
titles, wherewith antiquitie in many long-continued ages honoured but
one or two persons.  Plato hath by such an universall consent
borne-away the surname of Divine, that no man did ever attempt to
envie him for it.  And the Italians, which vaunt (and indeed with some
reason) to have generally more lively and farre-reaching wits, and
their discourse more solid and sinnowy, than other nations of their
times, have lately therewith embellished Peter Aretine; in whom,
except it be an high-raised, proudly-puft, mind-moving, and
heart-danting manner of speech, yet in good sooth more than ordinarie
wittie and ingenious; but so new-fangled, so extravagant, so
fantasticall, so deep-labored; and to conclude, besides the eloquence,
which be it as it may be, I cannot perceive any thing in it beyond or
exceeding that of many other writers of his age, much lesse that it in
any sort approacheth that ancient divinitie. And the surname Great, we
attribute and fasten the same on princes that have nothing in them
exceeding popular greatnesse.

CHAPTER 1.LII+ OF THE PARCIMONIE OF OUR FOREFATHERS

ATTILIUS REGULUS, Generall of the Romans Armie in Affrike, in the
middest of his glorie and victorie against the Carthaginians, writ
unto the common- wealth, that a hyne or plough-boy, whom he had left
alone to over-see and husband his land (which in all was but seven
acres of ground) was run away from his charge, and had stolne from him
all his implements and tools belonging to his husbandrie, craving
leave to be discharged, and that he might come home to looke to his
businesse, for feare his wife and children should thereby be
endomaged: the Senate tooke order for him, and appointed another man
to looke to his land and businesse, and made that good unto him which
the other had stolne from him, and appointed his wife and children to
be maintained at the common-wealths charge.  Cato the elder, returning
Consul from Spaine, sold his horse of service to save the monie he
should have spent for his transport by sea into Italy: And being
chiefe governor in Sardinia, went all his visitations afoot, having no
other traine but one officer of the commonwelth, who carried his gowne
and a vessell to do sacrifice in, and for the most part carried his
male himself.  He boasted that he never woare gowne that cost him more
than ten crowns,{Lear+} nor sent more than one shilling sterling to
the market for one whole daies provision, and had no country house
rough-cast or painted over.  Scipio Aemelianus, after he had triumphed
twice, and twice been Consull, went on a solemne legation, accompanied
and attended on only with seven servants.  It is reported that Homer
had never any

----- more than one servant, Plato three, and Zeno, chiefe of the
Stoikes sect, none at all.  Tiberius Gracchus, being then one of the
principal men amongst the Romanes, and sent in commission about
weightie matters of the common-wealth, was allotted but sixpence
halfe-penie a day for his charges.

CHAPTER 1.LIII+ OF A SAYING OF CAESAR

IF we shall sometimes ammuse our selves and consider our estate, and
the time we spend in controling others, and to know the things that
are without us; would we but emploie the same in sounding our selves
throughly, we should easily perceive how all this our contexture is
built of weake and decaying peaces.  Is it not an especiall testimonie
of imperfection that we cannot settle our contentment on any one
thing, and that even of our owne desire and imagination it is beyond
our power to chuse what we stand in need of?  Whereof, the disputation
that hath ever beene amongst Philosophers beareth sufficient witnes,
to finde out the chief felicitie or summum bonum of man, and which yet
doth and shall eternally last without resolution or agreement.


         ----- dum abest quod avemus, id exuperare videtur Caetera;
               post aliud, cum contigit illud, avemus

  Et sitis, aequa tenet./1


  While that is absent which we wish, the res

  That seemes to passe, when ought else is addrest, That we desire,
  with equall thirst opprest,

Whatsoever it be that falleth unto our knowledge and jovissance, we
finde it doth not satisfie us, and we still follow and gape after
future, uncertaine, and unknowne things, because the present and
knowne please us not, and doe not satisfie us.  Not (as I thinke)
because they have not sufficiently wherewith to satiate and please us,
but the reason is that we apprehend and

----- 1 LUCR. 1. iii. 25.

seize on them with an unruly, disordered, and diseased taste and
hold-fast.

  Nam cum vidit hic ad usum flagitat usus

  Onmia jam ferme mortalibus esse parata

  Divitiis homines et honore et laude potente

  Affluere, atque bona natorum excellere fama, esse donmi cuiquam
  tamen anxia corda

  Atque animum infestis cogi servire querelis

  Intellexit ibi vitium vas facere ipsum

  Omniaaque illius vitio corrumpier intu

  Quae collata foris et commoda quaeque venirent./1


  For when the wiseman saw, that all almost

  That use requires, for men prepared was

  That men enriches, honors, praises boast

  In good report of children others passe

  Yet none at home did beare lesse pensive heart

  But that the minde was forst to serve complain

  He knew, that fault the vessell did empart

  That all was marr'd within by vessels taint

  Whatever good was wrought by any art.

Our appetite is irresolute and uncertaine; it can neither hold nor
enjoy any thing handsomly and after a good fashion.  Man supposing it
is the vice and fault of things he possesseth, feedeth and filleth
himselfe with other things, which he neither knoweth nor hath
understanding of, whereto he applyeth both his desires and hopes, and
taketh them as an honour and reverence to himselfe; {Shylock+} as
saith Caesar, Communi fit vitio naturae, ut invisis, latitantibus
atque incognitis rebus magis confidamus vehementiusque exterreamur:/2
'It hapneth by the common fault of nature that both wee are more
confident and more terrified by things unseene, things hidden and
unknowne.

----- 1 LUCR. 1. ix. 2 CAES.  Bel.  Civ. 1. ii.

CHAPTER 1.LIV+ OF VAINE SUBTIL VAINE SUBTILTIES, OR SUBTILL DEVICES

THERE are certaine frivolous and vaine inventions, or as some call
them subtilties of wit, by meanes of which some men doe often
endeavour to get credit and reputation, as divers Poets that frame
whole volumes with verses beginning with one letter.  We see Egges,
Whigs, Hatchets, Crosses, Globes, Columnes, and figures anciently
fashioned by the Graecians, with the measure and proportion of their
verses spreading, lengthening and shortening them in such sort as they
justly represent represent such and such a figure. Such was the
science and profession of him who long time busied himselfe to number
how many severall waies the letters of the Alphabet might be ranged,
and found out that incredible number mentioned by Plutarke.  I allow
of his opinion who, having one brought before him that was taught with
such industrie, and so curiously to cast a graine of millet with his
hand, that without ever missing he would every time make it goe
through a needles-eye, and being entreated to bestow some thing upon
him (as a reward for so rare a skill), verie pleasantly and worthily
commanded that this cunnieg workman should have two or three peckes of
millet delivered him, to the end his rare art and wittie labour might
not remaine without dailie exercise.  It is a wonderfull testimonie of
our judgements imbecilitie that it should commend and allow of things,
either for their rarenesse or noveltie, or for their difficultie,
though neither goodnesse or profit {expediency+} be joined unto them.
We come but now from my house, where we have a while recreated our
selves with devising who could find out most things that held by both
extreme ends.  As for example, Sir is in our tongue a title only given
to the most eminent person of the state, which is the King, and yet is
commonly given to some of the vulgar sort, as unto Merchants and
Pedlars, and nothing concerneth those of the middle sort, and that are
betweene both.  Women of chiefest calling and qualitie are called
Dames, the meane sort Damoisels, and those of the basest ranke are
also entitled Dames. The clothes of estate, which we see set over
tables and chaires, are only allowed in Princes houses, yet we see
them used in tavernes.  Democritus was wont to say, 'That Gods and
beasts had quicker senses and sharper wits than men who are of the
middle ranke.' The Romans used to weare one selfe- same garment on
mourning and on festivall daies.  It is most certaine that both an
extreme feare and an exceeding heat of courage doe equally trouble and
distemper the belly.  The nick-name of Tremblant, wherewith Zanchio
the twelfth King of Navarre was surnamed, teacheth that boldnesse as
well as feare engender a startling and shaking of the limbs.  Those
which armed either him or any other of the like nature, whose skin
would quiver, assaid to re-assure him by diminishing the danger
wherein he was like to fall: you have no perfect knowledge of me (said
he), for if my flesh knew how far my courage will ere-long carry it,
it would presently fall into a flat swoune.  That chilnesse, or as I
may terme it, faintnesse, which we feel after the exercises of Venus,
the same doth also proceed from an over vehement appetite and
disordered heat.  Excessive heat and extreme cold doe both boile and
rost.  Aristotle saith, 'That leaden vessels doe as well melt and
consume away by an excessive cold and rigor of winter as by a vehement
heat.' Both desire and satietie fill the sense with sorrow both above
and under voluptuousnesse.  Folly and wisdome meet in one point of
feeling and resolution above the suffering of humane accidents.  The
wiser sort doth gourmondise and command evill, and others know it not:
The latter (as a man would say) short of accidents, the other beyond,
who after they have well weighed and considered their qualities, and
duly measured and rightly judged what they are, overleap them by the
power of a vigorous courage.  They disdaine and tread them under foot,
as having, a strong and solide minde, against which, if fortunes darts
{Hamlet+} chance to light, they must of necessitie be blunted and
abated meeting with so resisting a body, as they cannot pierce or make
any impression therein.  The ordinarie and meane condition of men
abideth betweene these two extremities, which are those that perceive
and have a feeling of mischiefs but cannot endure them.  Both infancie
and decreptitude meet with weaknesse of the braine. Covetise and
profusion in a like desire to acquire and hoard up.  It may with
likelihood be spoken that there is a kinde of Abecedarie ignorance
preceding science: another doctorall following science: an ignorance
which science doth beget, even as it spoileth the first.  Of simple,
lesse- curious, and least-instructed spirits are made good Christians;
who simply believe through reverence and obedience, and are kept in
awe of the lawes.  In the meane vigor of spirits, and slender
capacitie is engendered the error of opinions.  They follow the
apparance of the first sense, and have some title to interpret it
foolishnesse and sottishnesse, that we are confirmed in ancient waies
respecting us that are nothing therein instructed by study. The best,
most-settled, and clearest-seeing spirits make another sort of
well-beleevers, who by long and religious investigation, penetrate a
more profound and find out a more abstruse light in scriptures, and
discover the mysterious and divine secrets of our ecclesiastical
policie.  And therefore see we some of them that have reached unto
this last ranke, by the second, with wonderfull fruit and
confirmation, as unto the furthest bounds of Christian intelligence,
and enjoy their victorie with comfort, thanksgiving, reformation of
manners, and great modesty.  In which ranke my purpose is not to place
these others who to purge themselves from the suspicion of their
forepassed errors, and the better to assure us of them, become
extreme, indiscreet, and unjust in the conduct of our cause, and tax
and taint the same with infinite reproaches of violence.  The simple
peasants are honest men, so are philosophers (or as our time nameth
them, strong and cleare natures), enriched with a large instruction of
profitable sciences.  The mongrell sort of hushandmen, who have
disdained the first forme of ignorance of letters, and could never
reach unto the other (as they that sit betweene two stooles, of which
besides so many others I am one) are dangerous, peevish, foolish, and
importunate, and they which trouble the world most.  Therefore doe I
(as much as lieth in me) withdraw my selfe into the first and naturall
seat, whence I never assaied to depart.  Popular and meerely naturall
Poesie hath certaine graces and ill-bred liveliness, whereby it
concurreth and compareth it selfe unto the principall beautie of
perfect and artificiall Poesie as may plainly be seene in the
Villannelles, homely gigs, and countrie songs of Gasconie, which are
brought us from Nations that have no knowledge at all, either of any
learning or so much as of writing.  Meane and indifferent Poesie, and
that consisteth betweene both, is scorned and contemned and passed
without honour or esteemed.  But forasmuch as since the passage hath
beene opened unto the spirit, I have found (as it commonly hapneth)
that we had apprehended that which is neither so nor so for a
difficult exercise and of a rare subject; and that since our invention
hath been set on fire it discovereth an infinite number of like
examples.  I will onely adde this one: That if these Essayes were
worthy to be judged of, it might in mine opinion happen that they
would not greatfy please the common and vulgar spirits, and as little
the singular and excellent.  The first will understand but little of
them, the latter over much; they might perhaps live and rub out in the
middle region.

CHAPTER 1.LV+ OF SMELS AND ODORS

IT is reported of some, namely of Alexander, that their sweat, through
some rare and extraordinary complexion, yeelded a sweet smelling
flavour, whereof Plutarke and others seeke to find out the cause.  But
the common sort of bodies are cleane contrarie, and the best qualitie
they have is to be cleare of any smell at all.  The sweetnesse of the
purest breaths hath nothing more perfect in them than to bee without
savour that may offend us, as are those of healthy sound children.
And therefore saith Plautus:


  Mulier tum bene olet, ubi nihil olet./1

  Then smels a woman purely well


The most exquisit and sweetest savour of a woman it is to smell of
nothing; and sweet, well-smelling, strange savours may rightly be held
suspicious in such as use them; and a man may lawfully think who useth
them doth it to cover some naturall defect: whence proceed these
ancient Poeticall sayings, 'To smell sweetis to stinke.'

  Rides nos, Coracine, nil olentes

  Malo quam bene olere, nil oleres,/2


  You laugh at us that we of nothing savour

  Rather smel


And else where:

  Posthume, non bene olet, qui bene semper olet./3


  Good sir, he smells not ever sweet

  Who smells still sweeter than is meet.

----- 1 PLAU.  Mostel. act i. sc. 3. 2 MART. 1. vi.  Epig. lv. 4. 3
L. ii. Epig. xii. 4.

Yet love I greatly to be entertained with sweet smells, and hate
exceedingly all manner of sowre and ill savours, which

         ----- Namque sagacius unus odoror

  Polypus, an gravis hirsutis cubet hircus in alis,

  Quam canis acer ubi lateat sus./1


  Sooner smell I, whether a cancred nose

  Or ranke gote-smell in hairie arme-pits lie

  Than sharpes

The simplest and meerely natural smells are most pleasing unto me;
which care ought chiefly to concerne women.  In the verie heart of
Barbarie, the Scithian women, after they have washed themselves, did
sprinkle, dawbe, and powder all their bodies and faces over with a
certaine odoriferous drug that groweth in their countrie: which dust
and dawbing being taken away, when they come neere men, or their
husband, they remaine verie cleane, and with a verie sweet savouring
perfume.  What odour soever it be, it is strange to see what hold it
will take on me, and how apt my skin is to receive it.  He that
complaineth against nature, that she hath not created man with a fit
instrument, to carrie sweet smells fast-tied to his nose, is much to
blame: for they carrie themselves.  As for me in particular, my
mustachoes, which are verie thick, serve me for that purpose.  Let me
but approach my gloves or my hand-kercher to them, their smell will
sticke upon them a whole day.  They manifest the place I come from.
The close-smacking, sweetnesse-moving, love-alluring, and greedie-
smirking kisses of youth, were heretofore wont to sticke on them many
houres after; yet am I little subject to those popular diseases that
are taken by conversation and bred by the contagion of the ayre: And I
have escaped those of my time of which there hath beene many and
severall kinds, both in the Townes about me, and in our Armie: We read
of Socrates that during the time of many plagues and relapses of the
pestilence, which so often infested

----- 1 HOR.  Epod. xii. 4.

the Citie of Athens, he never forsooke or went out of the Towne: yet
was he the only man that was never infected, or that felt any
sicknesse. Physitians might (in mine opinion) draw more use and good
from odours than they doe.  For myselfe have often perceived that
according unto their strength and qualitie they change and alter, and
move my spirits, and worke strange effects in me: which makes me
approve the common saying, that the invention of incense and perfumes
in Churches, so ancient and so far- dispersed throughout all nations
and religions, had an especiall regard to rejoyce, to comfort, to
quicken, to rowze, and to purifie our senses, that so we might be the
apter and readier unto contemplation.  And the better to judge of it,
I would I had my part of the skill which some Cookes have, who can so
curiously season and temper strange odors with the savor and relish of
their meats. Asit was especially observed in the service of the King
of Tunes, who in our days landed at Naples, to meet and enter-parly
with the Enperour Charles the fifth.  His viandes were so exquisitely
farced, and so sumptuously seasoned with sweet odoriperous drugs and
aromaticall spices, that it was found upon his booke of accompt the
dressing of one peacocke and two fesants amounted to one hundred
duckets; which was their ordinarie manner of cooking his meats.  And
when they were carved up, not only the dining chambers, but all the
roomes of his palace and the streets round about it, were replenished
with an exceeding odoriferous and aromaticall vapour, which continued
a long time after.  The principall care I take, wheresoever I am
lodged, is to avoid and be far from all manner of filthy, foggy,
ill-savouring and unwholesome aires.  The;@ goodly Cities of
strangely-seated Venice and huge-built Paris, by reason of the muddy,
sharp, and offending savors which they yeeld; the one. by her fennie
and marish situation, the other by her durtie uncleannesse and
continuall mire, doe greatly alter and diminish the favor which I bear
them.

CHAPTER 1.LVI+ OF PRAIERS AND ORISONS

I PROPOSE certaine formelesse and irresolute fantasies, as do those
schollers who in schooles publish doubtfull and sophisticall questions
to be disputed and canvased: not to establiah the truth, but to find
it out, which I submit to their judgements, to whom the ordering and
directing not only of my actions and compositions, but, also of my
thoughts, belongeth. The condemnation, as well as the approbation of
them, will be equally acceptable and profitable unto me, deeming it
absurd and impious if anything be either ignorantly or unadvisedly set
downe in this rapsody, contrarie unto the sacred resolutions and
repugnant to the holy prescriptions of the Catholike, Apostolike, and
Romane Church, wherein I was borne, and out of which I purpose not to
die.  And therefore alwaies referring myselfe unto their censures that
have all power over me, doe I meddle so rashly to write of all manner
of purposes and discourses as I doe here.  I wot not whether I be
deceived, but, sithence by an especiall and singular favour of Gods
divine hounty, a certain forme of prayer hath by the very mouth of
God, word by word, been prescribed and directed unto us, I have ever
thought the use of it should be more ordinarie with us than it is.
And might I be believed, both rising and going to bed, sitting downe
and rising from boord, and going about any particular action or
businesse, I would have all good Christians to say the Paternoster,
and if no other praier, at least not to omit that.  The Church may
extend, amplifie, and diversifie praiers according to the need of our
instruction: For I know it is alwaies the same substance, and the same
thing.  But that one should ever have this privilege, that all manner
of people should at all times and upon every occasion have it in their
mouth: For it is most certaine that only it containeth whatsoever we
want, and is most fit and effectuall in all events.  It is the only
praier I use in every place, at all times, and upon every accidont;
and instead of changing, I use often repetition of it: whence it
commeth to passe that I remember none so well as that one.  I was even
now considering whence this generall errour commeth, that in all our
desseignes and enterprises, of what nature soever, we immediately have
recourse unto God, and in every necessitie we call upon his holy name:
And at what time soever we stand in need of any help and that our
weaknesse wanteth assistance, we only invoke him, without considering
whether the occasion be just or unjust; and what estate or action we
be in, or goe about, be it never so vicious or unlawfull we call upon
his name and power.  Indeed, he is our only protector, and of power to
affoord us all manner of helpe and comfort; but although he vouchsafe
to honour us with this joy- bringing fatherly adoption, yet is he as
just as he is good, and as good and just as he is mightle: But oftner
useth his justice than his might, and favoureth us according to the
reason of the same, and not according to our requests.  Plato in his
lawes maketh three sorts of injurious beliefs in the Gods: First, that
there is none at all; Secondly that they meddle not with our affaires;
Thirdly, that they never refuse any thing unto our vowes, offerings,
and sacrifices.  The first errour, according to his opinion, did never
continue immutable in man, even from his first infancie unto this
latter age.  The two succeeding may admit some constancie.  His
justice and power are inseparable. It is but in vaine to implore his
power in a had cause.  Man must have an unpolluted soule when he
praieth (at least in that moment he addresseth himselfe to pray) and
absolutely free from all vicious passions; otherwise we ourselves
present him the rods to scourge us withall.  In liew of redressing our
fault, we redouble the same by presenting him with an affection
fraught with irreverence, sinne, and hatred, to whom only we should
sue for grace and forgivenesse.  Loe here, why I doe not willingly
commend those Pharisaicall humours, whom I so often behold, and more
than ordinarie, to pray unto God, except their actions immediately
preceding or succeeding their praiers witnesse some show of
reformation or hope of amendment.

         ----- Si nocturnus adulte

  Tempora sanctonico velas adoperta cucullo./1


  If in a cape-cloake-hood befrenchifid

  Thou a

And the state of a man that commixeth devotion unto an execrable life,
seemeth in some sort to be more condemnable than that of one that is
conformable unto himselfe, and every way dissolute.  Therefore doth
our Church continually refuse the favour of her enterance and societie
unto customes and manners wilfully obstinate on some egregious
villanie.  We only pray by custome and use, and for fashion sake, or,
to say better we but reade and pronounce our prayers: To conclude, it
is nothing but a shew of formalitie, and a formall shew.  And it
greeveth me to see many men, who at grace before and after meat will
with great shew of devotion crosse themselves three or foure times
(and it vexeth me so much the more, when I call to mind that it is a
signe I greatly reverence, and have in continual use, yea, if I be but
gaping) and there whilst, shall you see th bestow all other houres of
the day in all maner of hatred, malice, covetousnesse, and
injustice. Many houres spend they about vice, but one to God, and that
as it were by way of recompense and composition.  It is wonderous to
see so far different and divers actions, continue with so even a
tenor, that no interruptions or alteration at all can be perceived,
either about their confines, or passage from one unto another.

----- 1 JUVEN.  Sat. viii. 144.

What prodigious conscience can be at any harts-ease, fostring, and
feeding with so mutuall, quiet, and agreeing society in one selfe same
mansion, both crime and judge?  A man whose Paillardize and luxurie
doth uncessantly sway and rule the head, and who judgeth the same
abhominable and most hatefull in the sight of God; what saith he unto
his all-seeing Majesty, when he openeth his lips, either of mouth or
hart, to speake to him of it?  He reclaimeth himselfe, but falleth
sodainly againe. 'If the object of his divine justice, and his
presence should strike (as he saith), and chastise his soule, how
short-soever the penitence were, feare it self would so often cast his
thought on it, that he would presently perceive himselfe master of
those vices which are habituated, inbred, setled, and enfleshed in
him.' But what of those which ground a whole life upon the fruit and
benefit of that sinne they know to be mortall?  How many trades+,
professions, occupations, and vocations have we daily and continually
used, frequented, and allowed amongst us, whose essence is vicious and
most pernicious?  And he that would needs confesse himselfe unto me,
and of his owne accord told me, that for feare of losing his credit
and to keepe the honour of his offices; he had for a whole age made
shew and profession, and acted the effects of a religion, which in his
owne selfe-accusing conscience he judged damnable, and cleane
contrarie unto that he had in his hart: How could he admit and fo@r so
contradictorie and impious a discourse in his hart?  With what
language entertaine they divine justice concerning this subject?
Their repentance, consisting in visible amends and manageable
reparation; they lose both towards God and us the meanes to alleage
the same.  Are they so malapart and fond-hardy as to crave pardon
without satisfaction, and sans repentance? I thinke it goeth with the
first as with the last: But obstinacie is not herein so easie to be
vanquished.  This so suddaine contrarietie, and violent volubilitie of
opinion, which they faine unto us, seemeth to me a miracle. They
present us with the state of an indigestible agonie.  How fantasticall
seemed their imagination unto me, who these latter yeares had taken up
a fashion, to checke and reprove all men that professed the Catholike
Religion, in whom shined any extraordinarie brightnesse of spirit,
saying, that it was but fained: and to doe him honour, held that
whatsoever he said in apparance he could not inwardly chuse but have
his beliefe reformed according to their byase.  It is a peevish
infirmitie for a man to thinke himselfe so firmely grounded as to
perswade himselfe that the contrarie may not be believed: And more
peevish also, to be perswaded by such a spirit, that preferreth I wot
not what disparitie of fortune, before the hopes and threats of
eternall life.  They may heleeve me: If any thing could have attempted
my youth, the ambition of the hazard and difficultie which followed
this late-moderne enterprize, should have had good part therein.  It
is not without great reason, in my poor judgement, that the Church
forbiddeth the confused, rash and indiscreet use of the sacred and
divine songs which the holy spirit hath indited unto David. God ought
not to be commixed in our actions, but with awful reverence, and an
attention full of honour and respect.  The word or voice is too
divine, having no other use but to exercise our lungs and to please
our eares. It is from the conscience and not from the tongue that it
must proceed. It is not consonant unto reason that a prentise or
shop-keeping boy, amiddest his idle, vaine, and frivolous conceits,
should be suffered to entertaine himselfe, and play therewith.  Nor is
it seemely or tolerable to see the sacred booke of our beliefes
Mysteries tossed up and downe and plaid withall, in a shop, or a hall,
or a kitchen.  They have heretofore beene accompted mysteries, but
through the abuse of times they are now held as sports and
recreations.  So serious and venerable a study should not, by way of
pastime and tumultuarie, be handled.  It ought to be a fixed, a
purposed, and setted action, to which this preface of our office
sursum corda should ever be adjoyned; and the very exterior parts of
the body should with such a countenance be referred unto it, that to
all mens eyes it may witnesse a particular attention and duteous
respect.  It is not a study fitting all mens but only such as have
vowed themselves unto it, and whom God hath, of his infinit mercie,
called thereto.  The wicked, the ungodly, and the ignorant, are
thereby empaired. it is no historie to be fabulously reported, but a
historie to be dutifully reverenced, awfully feared, and religiously
adored.  Are they not pleasantly conceited, who, because they have
reduced the same into the vulgar tongues, and that all men may
understand it, perswade themselves, that the people shall the better
conceive and digest the same?  Consisteth it but in the words, that
they understand not all they find written?  Shall I say more?  By
approaching thus little unto it, they goe back from it.  Meere
ignorance, and wholly relying on others, was verily more profitable
and wiser than is this verball and vaine knowledge, the nurse of
presumption and source of temeritie. {protestantism+} Moreover, I am
of opinion that the uncontrouled libertie, that all men have to wrest,
dissipate, and wyredraw a word so religious and important, to so many
severall idiomes, hath much more danger than profit following it.  The
Jewes, the Mahometans, and well- nigh all other nations, are wedded
unto and reverence the language wherein their mysteries and religion
had originally beene conceived; and any change or translation hath not
without apparance of reason beene directly forbidden.  Know we whether
there be Judges enow in Basque and in Brittanie to establish this
translation made in their tongue?  The universall Church hath no more
difficult and solemne judgement to make.  Both in speaking and
preaching the interpretation is wandring, free, and mutable, and of
one parcell; so it is not alike[.] One of the Grecian Historians doth
justly accuse his age, forasmuch as the secrets of Christian religion
were dispersed in all publike places, and even amongst the basest
artificers; and that every man might, at his pleasure, dispute of it,
and at random speake his mind of the same.  And it should be a great
shame for us, who by the unspeakable grace of God injoy the pure and
sacred mysteries of piety, to suffer the same to be profaned in the
mouthes of ignorant and popular people, seeing the very Gentiles
interdicted Socrates and Plato, and the wisest, to meddle, enquire or
speake of things communicated unto the Priestess of Delphos. Saying,
moreover, 'That the factions of Princes, touching the subject of
Divinities, are armed, not with zeale, but with anger, that zeale
dependeth of divine reason and justice, holding an orderly and
moderate course, but that it changeth into hatred and envie, and in
stead of corne and grape, it produceth nettles and darnell, if it be
directed by humane passion.' And justly saith this other, who
counselling the Emperour Theodosius, affirmed 'that disputations did
not so much appease and lull asleepe the schismes of the Church, as
stir up and cause heresies.' And therefore it hehooved to avoid all
contentions, controversies, and logicall arguing, and wholly and
sincerely refer himselfe unto the prescriptions and orders of faith,
established by our forefathers.  And Andronicus the Emperour finding
by chance in his pallace certaine principall men very earnestly
disputing against Lapodius about one of our points of great
importance, taunted and rated them very bitterly, and threatened if
they gave not over, he would cause them to be cast into the river.
Children and women doe now adaies governe and sway the oldest and most
experienced men concerning Eccleslasticall Lawes: whereas the first
that Plato made forbiddeth them to enquire after the reason of civill
Lawes, and which ought to stand in place of divine ordinances.
Allowing aged men to communicate the same amongst themselves, and with
the magistrate, adding moreover, alwaies provided it be not in the
presence of young men and before profane persons.  A notable Bishop
hath left written, that in the other end of the world there is an
island called of our predecessours Dioscorida, very commodious and
fertile of all sorts of fruits and trees, and of a pure and wholesome
ayre; whose people are Christians, and have Churches and Altars,
adorned with nothing else but crosses, without other images; great
observers of fasting and holy daies; exact payers of their priests
tithes, and so chaste that none of them may lawfully all his life long
know any more than one wife.  And in all other matters so well pleased
with their fortune, that being seated in the middest of the sea, they
have and know no use of ships: and so simple+, that of their religion,
which they so diligently and awfully observe, they know not, nor
understand so much as one only word.  A thing incredible to him that
knew not how the Pagans, who are so devout and zealous idolaters, know
nothing of their Gods but only their bare names and statues.  The
ancient beginning of Menalippe, a tragedie of Euripides, importeth
thus:

  Iupiter, car de toy rien sino

  Ie ne cognois seulement que le nom./1


  Iupiter, for unto m

I have also in my head certaine writings complained of, for so much as
they are meerely humane and philosophicall, without medling with the
diviity. He that should say to the contrarie, which a man might doe
with reason, that heavenly doctrine, as a Queene and governesse doth
better keepe her ranke apart; that she ought to be chiefe ruler and
principall head everie where, and not suffragant and subsidiarie: And
that peradventure examples in grammar, rethorike, and logike, might
more fitly and sortably be taken from elsewhere, than from so sacred
and holy a subject, as also the arguments of theatres, plots of
plaies, and grounds of publike spectacles: That mysteriously divine
reasons are more venerably and reverently considered alone, and in
their native stile, than joyned and compared to human discourse.  That
this fault is oftener seene, which is, that Divines write too
humanely, than this other, that humanists write not

----- 1 EURIP.

Theologically enough.  Philosophy, saith S.  Chrysostome, 'is long
since banished from sacred schools as an unprofitable servant, and
deemed unworthy to bebold, but in passing by the entrie or the vestrie
of the sacred treasures of heavenly doctrine.' That the formes of
humane speech are more base, and ought by no means to make any use of
the dignitie, majestie and preheminence of divine speech.  As for my
part I give it leave to say, Verbis indisciplinatis:/1 'With
undisciplined words: Fortune+, destinie, chance, accident, fate, good
lucke, ill lucke, the Gods, and other phrases, as best it pleaseth. I
repose humane fantasies and mine owne, simply as humane conceits, and
severally considered; not as setled, concluded, and directed by
celestiall ordinance, incapable of any doubt or alteration. {Lear+} A
matter of opinion, and not of faith.  What I discourse according to my
selfe, not what I believe according unto God, with a laicall fashion,
and not a clericall manner; yet ever most religious; As children
propose their essays, instructable, not instructing.  And might not a
man also say without apparance, that the institution which willeth no
man shall dare to write of religion but sparingly and reservedly,
except such as make expresse profession of it, would not want some
shew of profit and justice; and happily to me to be silent.  It hath
beene told me, that even those which are not of our consent do flatly
inhibite amongst themselves the use of the sacred name of God in all
their vulgar and familiar discourses.  They would have no man use it
as an interjection or exclamation, not to be alleaged as a witnesse or
comparison, wherein I find they have reason.  And howsoever it be that
we call God to our commerce and societie, it should be zealously,
seriously, and religiously.  There is, as far as I remember, such a
like discourse in Xenophon, wherein be declareth: That we should more
rarely pray unto God: forasmuch as it is not easie we should so often
settle our minds in so regular, so reformed, and so

----- 1 AUGUSTIN.  De Civ.  Dei, 1. x. c. 29.

devout a seat, where indeed it ought to be, to pray aright and
effectually: otherwise our praiers are not only vaine and
unprofitable, but vicious. 'Forgive us, say we, our offences, as we
forgive them that trespasse against us.' What else inferre we by that
petition, but that we offer him our soule void of all revenge+ and
free from all rancour?  We neverthelesse invoke God and call on his
aid, even in the complot of our grievousest faults, and desire his
assistance in all manner of injustice and iniquitie.

  Quae nisi seductis nequeas committere Divis./1

  Which you to Saints not drawne aside,

The covetous man sueth and praieth unto him for the vaine increase and
superfluous preservation of his wrong-gotten treasure.  The ambitious
he importuneth God for the conduct of his fortune, and that he may
have the victorie of all his desseignes.  The theefe, the pirate, the
murtherer, yea and the traitor, all call upon him, all implore his
aid, and all solicite him, to we thein courage in their attempts,
constancie in their resolutions to remove all lets and difficulties,
that in any sort may withstand their wicked executions and impious
actions, or give him thanks if they have had good successe; the one if
he have met with a good bootie, the other if he returne home rich, the
third if no man has seene him kill his enemie, and the last though he
have caused an execrable mischiefe.  The souldier, if he but goe to
besiege a cottage, to scale a castle, to rob a church, to pettard a
gate, to force a religious house, or any villanous act, before he
attempt it praieth to God for his assistance, though his intents and
hopes be full-fraught with crueltie, murther, covetise, luxurie,
sacrilege, and all iniquitie.  Hoc ipsum quo in Iovis aurem impellere
tentas

  Dic agedum, Staio: proh Iupiter, O bone, clamet,

  Iupiter! at sese non clamet Iupiter ipse./2


  Go-to then, say the same to some bad fellow

  Which thou prepar'st for Gods eares: let him bellow,

----- 1 PERS.  Sat. ii. 4. 2 Ib. 21.

  God, good God; so God

  On himselfe would nt plod.

Margaret, Queene of Navarre, maketh mention of a young prince, whom,
although she name not expressly, yet his greatnesse hath made him
sufficiently knowne, who going about an amorous assignation, and to be
with an advocates wife of Paris, his way lying alongst a church, he
did never passe by so holy a place, whether it were in going or
comming from his lecherie and cukolding-labour, but would make his
praiers unto God, to be his help and furtherance.  I would faine have
an impartiall man tell me to what purpose this prince invoked and
called on God for his divine favour, having his mind only bent to
sinne, and his thoughts set on luxurie: Yet doth she alleage him for a
speciall testimonie of singular devotion.  But it is not only by this
example a man might verifie that women are not very fit to manage or
treat matters of religion and divinitie.  A true and hartie praier,
and an unfained religious reconciliation from us unto God, cannot
likely fall into a wicked and impure soule, especially when Sathane
swaieth the same.  He that calleth upon God for his assistance, whilst
he is engulphed and wallowing in filthy sinne, doth as the cut-purse
that should call for justice unto his ayd, or those that produce God
in witnesse of a lie.

         ----- tacito mala vota susurr

  Concipimus./1


  With silent whispering

  There are few men that would dare to publish the secret requests
  they make to God.


    Haud cuivis promptum est, murmur que humilesque susurro

  Tollere de Templis et aperto vivere voto./2


  From Church low-whispering murmurs to expell,

  'Tis not for all, or with knowne vowes live well.

----- 1 LUCAN. 1.  V. 104. 2 PERS.  Sat. ii. 6.

And that's the reason why the Pythagorians would have them publike
that all night heare them, that no man should abusively call on God,
and require any undecen

         ----- Clare cum dixit, Apollo

  Labra movet metuens audiri: pulchra Lavern

  Da mihi fallere, da justum sanctumque videri

  Noctem peccatis, et fraudibus objice nubem./1


  When he alowd hath said, Apollo heare

  Loth to be heard, Goddesse of theeves, said he

  Grant me to cousen, and yet just appeare

  My faults.

The Gods did grievously punish the unpious vowes of Oedipus by
granting them unto him.  His praier was, that his children might
betweene themselves decide in armes the succession of his estate; he
was so miserable as to be taken at his word.  A man should not request
that all things follow our will, but that it may follow wisdome.
Verily, it seemeth that we make no other use of our praiers, than of a
companie of gibrish phrases: and as those who employ holy and sacred
words about witchcraft and magicall effects; and that we imagine their
effect dependeth of the contexture, or sound, or succession of words,
or from our countenance.  For, our soule, being full-fraught with
concupiscence and all manner of ungodly thoughts, nothing touched with
repentence, nor moved with new reconciliation towards God, we headlong
present unto him those heedlesse words which memorie affoordeth our
tongue, by which we hope to obtaine an expiation and remission of our
offences.  There is nothing so easie, so sweet, so comfortable and
favourable, as the law of God; she (of his infinit mercie) calleth us
unto him, how faultie and detestable soever we be; she gently
stretcheth forth her armes unto us and mildly receiveth us into her
lap, how guiltie, polluted, and sinfull soever we are, and may be in
aftertimes.  But in recompence of so houndlesse and unspeakable a

----- HOR. 1. i.  Epist. xvii. 59.

favour, she must be thankfully accepted, and cheerfully regarded: and
so gracious a pardon must be received with a gratitude of the soule,
and at least, in that instant, that we addresse ourselves unto her
presence, to have our soule grieved for her faults, penitent of her
sinnes, hating those passions and affections that have caused or
provoked us to transgresse his lawes, to offend his Majestie, and to
breake his commandments.  Plato saith that neither the Gods nor
holiest men will ever accept the offering of a wicked man.  Immunis
aram si tetigit manus

  Non sumptuosa blandior hosti

  Mollivit aversos Penates

  Farre pio et saliente mica./1


  If guiltlesse hand the Altar tuch

  No offring, cost it neer so much

  Shall better please our God offended

  Than corne with crackling-corne-salt blended.

----- HOR. 1. iii.  Od. xxiii.

CHAPTER 1.LVII+ OF AGE

I CANNOT receive that manner, whereby we establish the continuance of
our life.  I see that some of the wiser sort doe greatly shorten the
same in respect of the common opinion.  What said Cato Iunior, to
those who sought to hinder him from killing himselfe? 'Doe I now live
the age, wherein I may justly be reproved to leave my life too soone?'
Yet was he but eight and fortie yeares old.  He thought that age very
ripe, yea, and well advanced, considering how few men come unto
it. {usthem+} And such as entertaine themselves with I wot not what
kind of course, which they call naturall, promiseth some few yeares
beyond, might do it, had they a privilege that could exempt them from
so great a number of accidents, unto which each one of us stands
subject by a naturall subjection and which may interrupt the said
course they propose unto themselves.  What fondnesse is it for a man
to thinke he shall die, for and through a failing and defect of
strength, which extreme age draweth with it, and to propose that terme
unto our life, seeing it is the rarest kind of all deaths and least in
use?  We only call it naturall, as if it were against nature to see a
man breake his necke with a fall; to be drowned by shipwracke; to be
surprised with a pestilence or pleurisie, and as if our ordinarie
condition did not present these inconveniences unto us all.  Let us
not flatter ourselves with these fond-goodly words: a man may
peradventure rather call that naturall which is generall, common, and
universall.  To die of age is a rare, singular, and extraordinarie
death, and so much lesse naturall than others: It is the last and
extremest kind of dying: The further it is from us, so much the lesse
is it to be hoped for: Indeed it is the limit beyond which we shall
not passe, and which the law of nature hath prescribed unto us as that
which should not be outgone by any: but it is a rare privilege
peculiar unto her selfe, to make us continue unto it.  It is an
exemption, which through gotne particular favour she bestoweth on some
one man, in the space of two or three ages, discharging him from the
crosses, troubles, and difficulties she hath enterposed betweene both
in this long cariere and pilgrimage. Therefore my opimon is, to
consider that the age unto which we are come is an age whereto few
arive: since men come not unto it by any ordinarie course, it is a
signe we are verie forward.  And since we have past the accustomed
bounds, which is the true measure of our life, we must not hope that
we shall goe much further.  Having escaped so many occasions of death,
wherein we see the world to fall, we must acknowledge that such an
extraordinarie fortune as that is, which maintaineth us, and is beyond
the common use, is not likely to continue long. [M published this
1580. age 47; d. age 59] It is a fault of the verie lawes to have this
false imagination: They allow not a man to be capable and of
discretion to manage and dispose of his owne goods, until he be five
and twentie yeares old, yet shall he hardly preserve the state of his
life so long.  Augustus abridged five yeares of the ancient Romane
lawes, and declared that for any man that should take upon him the
charge of judgement, it sufficed to be thirtie yeares old. Servius
Tullius dispensed with the Knights who were seven and fortie yeares of
age from all voluntarie services of warre.  Augustus brought them to
fortie and five.  To send men to their place of sojourning before they
be five and fiftie or three score yeares of age, me seemeth carrieth
no great apparance with it.  My advice would be, that our vacation and
employment should be extended as I far as might be for the publike
commoditie; but I blame some, and condemne most, that we begin not
soone enough to employ our selves.  The same Augustus had been
universall] and supreme judge of the world when he was but nineteene
yeares old, and would have another to be thirtie before he shall bee
made a competent Judge of a cottage or farme.  As for my part, I
thinke our minds are as full growne and perfectly joynted at twentie
yeares as they should be, and promise as much as they can.  A mind
which at that age hath not given some evident token or earnest of her
sufficiencie, shall hardly give it afterward, put her to what triall
you list.  Natural qualities and vertues, if they have any vigorous or
beauteous thing in them, will produce and shew the same within that
time, or ever.  They say in Dauphine,

  Si l'espine nou picque quand nai

  A peine que picque jamai./1


  A thorne, unlesse at first it pricke

Of all humane honourable and glorious actions that ever came unto my
knowledge, of what nature soever they be, I am perswaded I should have
a harder taske to number those which, both in ancient times and in
ours, have beene produced and atchieved before the age of thirtie
yeares, than such as were performed after: yea, often in the life of
the same men.  May not I boldly speake it of those of Hanniball and
Scipio his great adversarie?  They lived the better part of their life
with the glorie which they had gotten in their youth: And though
afterward ihey were great men in respect of all others, yet were they
but meane in regard of themselves.  As for my particular, I am verily
perswaded, that since that age both my spirit and my body have more
decreased than encreased, more recoyled than advanced.  It may be,
that knowledge and experience shall encrease in them, together with
life, that bestow their time well: but vivacitie, promptitude,
constancie, and other parts much more our owne, more important and
more essentiall, they droope, they languish, and they faint.

----- 1 French proverb.


         ----- ubi jam validis quassatum est virihus aevi

  Corpus, et obtusia ceciderunt viribus artus,

  Claudicat ingenium, delirat lingtiaque meusque./1


  When once the body by shrewd strength of yeares

  Is shak't, and limmes drawne downe firom strength that weares,

  Wit halts, both tongue and mind

  Doe daily foat, we find.

It is the body which sometimes yeeldeth flrst unto age, and other
times the mind; and I have seene many that have had their braines
weakened before their stomacke or legges.  And forasmuch as it is a
disease, little or nothing sensible unto him that endureth it, and
maketh no great show, it is so much the more dangerous.  Here I
exclaime against our Lawes, not because they leave us so long and late
in working and employment, but that they set us a worke no sooner, and
it is so late before we be employed.  Me thinkes that considering the
weaknesse of our life, and seeing the infinit number of ordinarie
rockes and naturall dangers it is subject unto, we should not so soone
as we come into the world, alot so great a share thereof unto
unprofitable wantonnesse in youth, il-breeding idlenesse, and
slow-learning prentissage.

----- 1 LUCRET. 1. iii. 457.


