BOOK I+ 

MORAL GOODNESS

1 I. My dear son Marcus, you have now been studying a full year under
Cratippus, and that too in Athens, and you should be fully equipped
with the practical precepts and the principles of philosophy; so much
at least one might expect from the pre-eminence not only of your
teacher but also of the city; the former is able to enrich you with
learning, the latter to supply you with models. Nevertheless, just as
I for my own improvement have always combined Greek and Latin studies
- and I have done this not only in the study of philosophy but also in
the practice of oratory - so I recommend that you should do the same,
so that you may have equal command of both languages. And it is in
this very direction that I have, if I mistake not, rendered a great
service to our countrymen, so that not only those who are unacquainted
with Greek literature but even the cultured consider that they have
gained much both in oratorical power and in mental training.

2 You will, therefore, learn from the foremost of present-day
philosophers, and you will go on learning as long as you wish; and
your wish ought to continue as long as you are not dissatisfied with
the progress you are making.  For all that, if you will read my philos
hical books, you will be helped; my philosophy is not very different
from that of the Peripatetics (for both they and I claim to be
followers of Socrates+ and Plato+). As to the conclusions you may
reach, I leave that to your own judgment (for I would put no hindrance
in your way), but by reading my philosophical <Off-3> BOOK I. i.
writings you will be sure to render your mastery of the Latin language
more complete. But I would by no means have you think that this is
said boastfully. For there are many to whom I yield precedence in the
knowledge of philosophy; but if I lay claim to the orator's peculiar
ability to speak with propriety, clearness, elegance, I think my claim
is in a measure justified, for I have spent my life in that
profession.

3 And therefore, my dear Cicero, I cordially recommend you to read
carefully not only my orations but also these books of mine on
philosophy, which are now about as extensive. For while the orations
exhibit a more vigorous style, yet the unimpassioned, restrained style
of my philosophical productions is also worth cultivating. Moreover,
for the same man to succeed in both departments, both in the forensic
style and in that of calm philosophic discussion has not, I observe,
been the good fortune of any one of the Greeks so far, unless,
perhaps, Demetrius of Phalerum can be reckoned in that number - a
clever reasoner, indeed, and, though rather a spiritless orator, he is
yet charming, so that you can recognize in him the disciple of
Theophrastus. But let others judge how much I have accomplished in
each pursuit; I have at least attempted both.

4 I believe, of course, that if Plato had been willing to devote
himself to forensic oratory, he could have spoken with the greatest
eloquence and power; and that if Demosthenes had continued the studies
he pursued with Plato and had wished to expound his views, he could
have done so with elegance and brilliancy. I feel the same way about
Aristotle and Isocrates, each of whom, engrossed in his own
profession, undervalued that of the other. But since I have decided to
write you a little now (and a great deal by and by), I wish, if
possible, to begin with a matter most suited at once to your years and
to my position. Although philosophy offers many problems, both
important and useful, that have been fully and carefully discussed by
philosophers, those teachings which have been handed down on the
subject of moral duties seem to have the widest practical
application. For no phase of life, whether public or private, whether
in business or in the home, whether one is working on what concerns
oneself alone or dealing with another, can be without its moral duty+;
on the discharge of such duties depends all that is morally right, and
on their neglect all that is morally wrong in life.

5 Moreover, the subject of this inquiry is the common property of all
philosophers; for who would presume to call himself a philosopher, if
he did not inculcate any lessons of duty? But there are some schools
that distort all notions of duty by the theories they propose touching
the supreme good and the supreme evil. For he who posits the supreme
good as having no connection with virtue and measures it not by a
moral standard but by his own interests - if he should be consistent
and not rather at times over-ruled by his better nature, he could
value neither friendship nor justice nor generosity; and brave he
surely cannot possibly be that counts pain the supreme evil, nor
temperate he that holds pleasure to be the supreme good.

6 Alhough these truths are so self-evident that the subject does not
call for discussion, still I have discussed it in another
connection. If, therefore these schools should claim to be consistent,
they could not say anything about duty; and no fixed, invariable,
natural rules of duty can be posited except by those who say that
moral goodness is worth seeking solely or chiefly for its own sake.
Accordingly, the teaching of ethics is the peculiar right of the
Stoics, the Academicians, and the Peripatetics; for the theories of
Aristo, Pyrrho, and Erillus have been long since rejected; and vet
they would have the right to discuss duty if they had left us any
power of choosing between things, so that there might be a way of
finding out what duty is. I shall, therefore, at this time and in this
investigation follow chiefly the Stoics, not as a translator, but, as
is my custom, I shall at my own option and discretion draw from those
sources in such measure and in such manner as shall suit my purpose.

7 Since, therefore, the whole discussion is to be on the subject of
duty, I should like at the outset to define what duty+ is, as, to my
surprise, Panaetius has failed to do. For every systematic development
of any subject ought to begin with a definition, so that everyone may
understand what the discussion is about. III. Every treatise on duty
has two parts: one, dealing with the doctrine of the supreme good; the
other with the practical rules by which daily life in all its bearings
may be regulated. The following questions are illustrative of the
first part: whether all duties are absolute; whether one duty is more
important than another; and so on. But as regards special duties for
which positive rules are laid down, though they are affected by the
doctrine of the supreme good, still the fact is not so obvious,
because they seem rather to look to the regulation of every- day life;
and it is these special duties that I propose to treat at length in
the following books.

8 And yet there is still another classification of duties: we
distinguish between "mean"/a duty, so-called, and "absolute"
duty. Absolute duty we may, I presume, call "right," for the Greeks
call it Ka,r4pOo)ua, while the ordinary duty they call KaOiKOV. And
the meaning of those terms they fix thus: whatever is right they
define as "absolute" duty, but "mean" duty, they say, is duty for the
performanceof which an adequate reason may be rendered.

9 The consideration necessary to determine conduct is, ` therefore, as 
Panaetius thinks, a threefold one: first, people question whether the
contemplated act is morally right or morally wrong; and in such
deliberation their minds are often led to widely divergent
conclusions. And then they examine and consider the question whether
the action contemplated is or is not conducive to comfort and
happiness in life, to the command of means and wealth, to influence,
and to power, by which they may be able to help themselves and their
friends; this whole matter turns upon a question of expediency+. The
third type of question arises when that which seems to be expedient
seems to conflict with that which is morally right; for when
expediency seems to be pulling one way, while moral right seems to be
calling back in the opposite direction, the result is that the mind is
distracted in its inquiry and brings to it the irresolution that is
born of deliberation.


---- Footnote ----

a Cicero's technical terms are difficult because he has to invent them
to translate Greek that is perfectly simple:

"rectum+" is 'right,' i.e. perfect, absolute. Its opposite is "medium," 'mean,' i.e. falling short of the 'absolute' and occupying a middle ground; common, ordinary. 

"honestum+" is 'morally right'; as a noun, 'moral goodness' (= honestas); its opposite is "turpe," 'morally wrong.' 

"honestas+" is 'moral rectitude' - 'moral goodness'; 'morality'; it's opposite "turpitudo+," 'moral wrong,' 'immorality.' 

"honestus+", on the other hand, is always 'honourable';

"honores" are always 'offices of honour.'

------------------

10 Although omission is a most serious defect in classification, two
points have been overlooked in the foregoing: for we usually consider
not only whether an action is morally right or morally wrong, but
also, when a choice of two morally right courses is offered, which one
is morally better; and likewise, when a choice of two expedients is
offered, which one is more expedient. Thus the question which
Panaetius thought threefold ought, we find, to be divided into five
parts. First, therefore, we must discuss the moral - and that, under
two sub-heads; secondly, in the same manner, the expedient; and
finally, the cases where they must be weighed against each other.

11 IV. First of all, Nature has endowed every species of living
creature with the instinct of self- preservation, of avoiding what
seems likely to cause injury to life or limb, and of procuring and
providing everything needful for life -food, shelter, and the like. A
common property of all creatures is also the reproductive instinct
(the purpose of which is the propagation of the species) and also a
certain amount of concern for their offspring. But the most marked
difference between man and beast is this: the beast, just as far as it
is moved by the senses and with very little perception of past or
future, adapts itself to that alone which is present at the moment;
while man - because he is endowed with reason+, by which he
comprehends the chain of consequences, perceives the causes of things,
understands the relation of cause to effect and of effect to cause,
draws analogies, and connects and associates the present and the
future -easily surveys the course of his whole life and makes the
necessary preparations for its conduct.

~~~ strangely tender love for his offspring. She also prompts men to
meet in companies, to form public assemblies and to take part in them
themselves; and she further dictates, as a consequence of this, the
effort on man's part to provide a store of things that minister to his
comforts and wants - and not for himself alone, but for his wife and
children and the others whom he holds dear and for whom he ought to
provide; and this responsibility also stimulates his courage and makes
it stronger for the active duties of life. 13 Above all, the search
after truth and its eager pursuit are peculiar to man. And so, when we
have leisure from the demands of business cares, we are eager to see,
to hear, to learn something new, and we esteem a desire to know the
secrets or wonders of creation as indispensable to a happy life. Thus
we come to understand that what is true, simple, and genuine appeals
most strongly to a man's nature. {PlainDealer+} To this passion for
discovering truth there is added a hungering, as it were, for
independence, so that a mind well-moulded by Nature is unwilling to be
subject to anybody save one who gives rules of conduct or is a teacher
of truth or who, for the general good, rules according to justice and
law. From this attitude come greatness_of_soul+ and a sense of
superiority to worldly conditions.

14 And it is no mean manifestation of Nature and Reason that man is
the only animal that has a feeling for order, for propriety, for
moderation in word and deed. And so no other animal has a sense of
beauty, loveliness, harmony in the visible world; and Nature and
Reason, extending the analogy of this from the world of sense to the
world of spirit, find that beauty, consistency, order are far more to
be maintained in thought and deed, and the same Nature and Reason are
careful to do nothing in an improper or unmanly fashion, and in every
thought and deed to do or think nothing capriciously. It is from these
elements that is forged and fashioned that moral goodness which is the
subject of this inquiry - something that, even though it be not
generally ennobled, is still worthy of all honour;/a and by its own
nature, we correctly maintain, it merits praise even though it be
praised by none.

15 V. You see here, Marcus, my son, the very form and as it were the face of Moral Goodness; "and if," as Plato says, "it could be seen with the physical eye, it would awaken a marvellous love of wisdom." But all that is morally right rises from some one of four sources: it is concerned either (1) with the full perception and intelligent development of the true; or (2) with the conservation of organized society+, with rendering to every man his due, and with the faithful+ discharge of obligations assumed; or (3) with the greatness and strength of a noble and invincible spirit; or (4) with the orderliness and moderation of everything that is said and done, wherein consist temperance and self-control. (15) Although these four are connected and interwoven, still it is in each one considered singly that certain definite kinds of moral duties have their origin: in that category, for instance, which was designated first in our division and in which we place wisdom and prudence, belong the search after truth and its discovery; and this is the peculiar 16 province of that virtue. For the more clearly anyone observes the most essential truth in any given 

---- Footnote ----

a. Cicero plays on the double meaning of honestum: 1) "moral
goodness," and 2) "honourable" "distinguished," etc.  <Off-17> BOOK
I. v.-vi.  case and the more quickly and accurately he can see and
explain the reasons for it, the more understanding and wise he is
generally esteemed, and justly so. So, then, it is truth that is, as
it were, the stuff with which this virtue has to deal and on which it
employs itself.

------------------

17 Before the three remaining virtues, on the other hand, is set the
task of providing and maintaining those things on which the practical
business of life depends so that the relations of man to man in human
society may be conserved, and that largeness and nobility of soul may
be revealed not only in increasing one's resources and acquiring
advantages for one's self and one's family but far more in rising
superior to these very things. But orderly behaviour and consistency
of demeanor and self-control and the like have their sphere in that
department of things in which a certain amount of physical exertion,
and not mental activity merely, is required. For if we bring a certain
amount of propriety and order into the transactions of daily life, we
shall be conserving moral rectitude and moral dignity.

18 VI. Now, of the four divisions which we have made of the essential
idea of moral goodness, the first, consisting in the knowledge of
truth, touches human nature most closely. For we are all attracted and
drawn to a zeal for learning and knowing; and we think it glorious to
excel therein, while we count it base and immoral to fall into error,
to wander from the truth, to be ignorant, to be led astray. In this
pursuit, which is both natural and morally right, two errors are to be
avoided: first, we must not treat the unknown as known and too readily
accept it; and he who wishes to avoid this error (as all should do)
will devote both time and attention

19 to the weighing of evidence. The other error is that some people
devote too much industry and too deep study to matters that are
obscure and difficult and useless as well. {Prospero+} If these errors
are successfully avoided, all the labour and pains expended upon
problems that are morally right and worth the solving will be fully
rewarded. Such a worker in the field of astronomy, for example, was
Gaius Sulpicius, of whom we have heard; in mathematics, Sextus Pompey,
whom I have known personally; in dialectics, many; in civil law, still
more. All these professions are occupied with the search after truth;
but to be drawn by study away from active life is contrary to moral
duty. For the whole glory of virtue is in activity; activity, however,
may often be interrupted, and many opportunities for returning to
study are opened. Besides, the working of the mind, which is never at
rest, can keep us busy in the pursuit of knowledge even without
conscious effort on our part. Moreover, all our thought and mental
activity will be devoted either to planning for things that are
morally right and that conduce to a good and happy life, or to the
pursuits of science and learning. With this we close the discussion of
the first source of duty. 

20 VII. Of the three remaining divisions, the most extensive in its
application is the principle by which society+ and what we may call
its "common bonds" are maintained. Of this again there are two
divisions - justice, in which is the crowning glory of the virtues and
on the basis of which men are called "good men"; and, close akin to
justice, charity, which may also be called kindness or
generosity+. The first office of justice is to keep one man from doing
harm to another, unless provoked by wrong; and the next is to lead men
to use common possessions for the common interests, private property+
for their own.

21 There is, however, no such thing as private ownership established
by nature, but property becomes private either through long occupancy
(as in the case of those who long ago settled in unoccupied territory)
or through conquest (is in the case of those who took it in war) or by
due process of law, bargain, or purchase, or by allotment. On this
principle the lands of Arpinum are said to belong to the Arpinates,
the Tusculan lands to the Tusculans; and similar is the assignment of
private property. Therefore, inasmuch as in each case some of those
things which by nature had been common property became the property of
individuals, each one should retain possession of that which has
fallen to his lot; and if anyone appropriates to himself anything
beyond that, he will be violating the laws of human society.

22 But since, as Plato has admirably expressed it, we are not born for
ourselves alone, but our country claims a share of our being, and our
friends a share; and since, as the Stoics hold, everything that the
earth produces is created for man's use; and as men, too, are born for
the sake of men, that they may be able mutually to help one another;
in this direction we ought to follow Nature as our guide, to
contribute to the general good by an interchange of acts of kindness,
by giving and receiving, and thus by our skill, our industry, and our
talents to cement human society more closely together, man to
man. {social_cement+}


23 The foundation of justice, moreover, is good_faith+; - that is,
truth and fidelity+ to promises and agreements. And therefore we may
follow the Stoics, who diligently investigate the etymology of words;
and we may accept their statement that "good faith" is so called
because what is promised is "made good," although some may find this
derivation/a rather farfetched. There are, on the other hand, two
kinds of injustice - the one, on the part of those who inflict wrong,
the other on the part of those who, when they can, do not shield from
wrong those upon whom it is being inflicted. For he who, under the
influence of anger or some other passion, wrongfully assaults another
seems, as it were, to be laying violent hands upon a comrade; but he
who does not prevent or oppose wrong, if he can, is just as guilty of
wrong as if he deserted his parents or his friends or his country.

24 Then, too, those very wrongs which people try to inflict on purpose
to injure are often the result of fear: that is, he who premeditates
injuring another is afraid that, if he does not do so, he may himself
be made to suffer some hurt. But, for the most part, people are led to
wrong-doing in order to secure some personal end; in this vice,
avarice is generally the controlling motive.

25 VIII. Again, men seekriches+ partly to supply the needs of life,
partly to secure the enjoyment of pleasure. With those who cherish
higher ambitions, the desire for wealth is entertained with a view to
power and influence and the means of bestowing favours; Marcus
Crassus, for example, not long since declared that no amount of wealth
was enough for the man who aspired to be the foremost citizen of the
state, unless with the income from it he could maintain an
army. {magnificence+} Fine establishments and the comforts of life in
elegance and abundance also afford pleasure, and the desire to secure
it gives rise to the insatiable thirst for wealth. Still, I do not
mean to find fault with the accumulation of property, provided it
hurts nobody, but unjust acquisition of it is always to be avoided.

26 The great majority of people, however, when they fall a prey to
ambition+ for either military or civil authority, are carried away by
it so completely that they quite lose sight of the claims of
justice. For Ennius says: There is no fellowship inviolate, No faith
is kept, when kingship+ is concerned; and the truth of his words has
an uncommonly wide application. For whenever a situation is of such a
nature that not more than one can hold preeminence in it, competition
for it usually becomes so keen that it is an extremely difficult
matter to maintain a "fellowship inviolate." We saw this proved but
now in the effrontery of Gaius Caesar, who, to gain that sovereign
power which by a depraved imagination he had conceived in his fancy,
trod underfoot all laws of gods and men. But the trouble about this
matter is that it is in the greatest souls and in the most brilliant
geniuses that we usually find ambitions for civil and military
authority, for power, and for glory, springing; and therefore we must
be the more heedful not to go wrong in that direction.

27 But in any case of injustice it makes a vast deal of difference
whether the wrong is done as a result of some impulse of passion,
which is usually brief and transient, or whether it is committed
wilfully and with premeditation; for offences that come through some
sudden impulse are less culpable than those committed designedly and
with malice aforethought. But enough has been said on the subject of
inflicting injury.

28 IX. The motives for failure to prevent injury and so for slighting
duty are likely to be various: people either are reluctant to incur
enmity or trouble or expense; or through indifference, indolence, or
incompetence, or through some preoccupation or self- interest they are
so absorbed that they suffer those to be neglected whom it is their
duty to protect. And so there is reason to fear that what Plato
declares of the philosophers may be inadequate, when he says that they
are just because they are busied with the pursuit of truth and because
they despise and count as naught that which most men eagerly seek and
for which they are prone to do battle against each other to the
death. For they secure one sort of justice, to be sure, in that they
do no positive wrong to anyone, but they fall into the opposite
injustice; for hampered by their pursuit of learning they leave to
their fate those whom they ought to defend. And so, Plato thinks, they
will not even assume their civic duties except under compulsion. But
in fact it were better that they should assume them of their own
accord; for an action intrinsically right is just only on condition
that it is voluntary.

29 There are some also who, either from zeal in attending to their own
business or through some sort of aversion to their fellow- men, claim
that they are occupied solely with their own affairs, without seeming
to themselves to be doing anyone any injury. But while they steer
clear of the one kind of injustice, they fall into the other: they are
traitors to social life, for they contribute to it none of their
interest, none of their effort, none of their means. {Prospero+} Now
since we have set forth the two kinds of injustice and assigned the
motives that lead to each, and since we have previously established
the principles by which justice is constituted, we shall be in a
position easily to decide what our duty on each occasion is, unless we
are extremely self-centred; for

30 indeed it is not an easy matter to be really concerned with other
people's affairs; and yet in Terence's play, we know, Chremes "thinks
that nothing that concerns man is foreign to him." {common+}
Nevertheless, when things turn out for our own good or ill, we realize
it more fully and feel it more deeply than when the same things happen
to others and we see them only, as it were, in the far distance; and
for this reason we judge their case differently from our own. It is,
therefore, an excellent rule that they give who bid us not to do a
thing, when there is a doubt whether it be right or wrong; for
righteousness+ shines with a brilliance of its own, but doubt is a
sign that we are thinking of a possible wrong. {PlainDealer+}

31 X. But occasions often arise, when those duties which seem most
becoming to the just man and to the "good man," as we call him,
undergo a change and take on a contrary aspect. It may, for example,
not be a duty to restore a trust or to fulfil a promise, and it may
become right and proper sometimes to evade and not to observe what
truth and honour would usually demand. For we may well be guided by
those fundamental principles of justice which I laid down at the
outset: first, that no harm be done to anyone; second, that the common
interests be conserved. When these are modified under changed
circumstances, moral duty also undergoes a change

32 and it does not always remain the same. For a given promise or
agreement may turn out in such a way that its performance will prove
detrimental either to the one to whom the promise has been made or to
the one who has made it. If, for example, Neptune, in the drama, had
not carried out his promise to Theseus, Theseus would not have lost
his son Hippolytus; for, as the story runs, of the three wishes/a that
Neptune had promised to grant him the third was this: in a fit of
anger+ he prayed for the death of Hippolytus, and the granting of this
prayer plunged him into unspeakable grief. Promises+ are, therefore,
not to be kept, if the keeping of them is to prove harmful to those to
whom you have made them; and, if the fulfilment of a promise should do
more harm to you than good to him to whom you have made it, it is no
violation of moral duty to give the greater good precedence over the
lesser good. For example, if you have made an appointment with anyone
to appear as his advocate in court, and if in the meantime your son
should fall dangerously ill, it would be no breach of your moral duty
to fail in what you agreed to do; nay, rather, he to whom your promise
was given would have a false conception of duty if he should complain
that he had been deserted in time of need. Further than this, who
fails to see that those promises are not binding which are extorted by
intimidation or which we make when misled by false pretences? Such
obligations are annulled in most cases by the praetor's edict in
equity,/a in some cases by the laws.

33 Injustice often arises also through chicanery+, that is, through an
over-subtle and even fraudulent construction of the law. This it is
that gave rise to the now familiar saw, "More law, less justice."
Through such interpretation also a great deal of wrong is committed in
transactions between state and state; thus, when a truce had been made
with the enemy for thirty days, a famous general/a went to ravaging
their fields by night, because, he said, the truce stipulated "days,"
not nights. Not even our own countryman's action is to be commended,
if what is told of Quintus Fabius Labeo is true - or whoever it was
(for I have no authority but hearsay): appointed by the Senate to
arbitrate a boundary dispute between Nola and Naples, he took up the
case and interviewed both parties separately, asking them not to
proceed in a covetous or grasping spirit, but to make some concession
rather than claim some accession. When each party had agreed to this,
there was a considerable strip of territory left between them. And so
he set the boundary of each city as each had severally agreed; and the
tract in between he awarded to the Roman People. Now that is
swindling, not arbitration. And therefore such sharp practice is under
all circumstances to be avoided.  XI. Again, there are certain duties
that we owe even to those who have wronged us. For there is a limit to
retribution and to punishment; or rather, I am inclined to think, it
is sufficient that the aggressor should be brought to repent of his
wrong- doing, in order that he may not repeat the offence and that
others may be deterred from doing wrong.

34 Then, too, in the case of a state in its external relations, the
rights of war must be strictly observed. For since there are two ways
of settling a dispute: first, by discussion; second; by physical
force; and since the former is characteristic of man, the latter of
the brute, we must resort to force only in case

35 we may not avail ourselves of discussion. The only excuse,
therefore, for going to war is that we may live in peace unharmed; and
when the victory is won, we should spare those who have not been
blood-thirsty and barbarous in their warfare. For instance, our
forefathers actually admitted to full rights of citizenship the
Tusculans, Acquians, Volscians, Sabines, and Hernicians, but they
razed Carthage and Numantia to the ground. I wish they had not
destroyed Corinth; but I believe they had some special reason for what
they did - its convenient situation, probably - and feared that its
very location might some day furnish a temptation to renew the war. In
my opinion, at least, we should always strive to secure a peace that
shall not admit of guile. And if my advice had been heeded on this
point, we should still have at least some sort of constitutional
government, if not the best in the world, whereas, as it is, we have
none at all. Not only must we show consideration for those whom we
have conquered by force of arms but we must also ensure protection to
those who lay down their arms and throw themselves upon the mercy+ of
our generals, even though the battering-ram has hammered at their
walls. And among our countrymen justice has been observed so
conscientiously in this direction, that those who have given promise
of protection to states or nations subdued in war become, after the
custom of our forefathers, the patrons of those states.

36 As for war, humane laws touching it are drawn up in the fetial code
of the Roman People under all the guarantees of religion; and from
this it may be gathered that no war is just, unless it is entered upon
after an official demand for satisfaction has been submitted or
warning has been given and a formal declaration made. Popilius was
general in command of a province. In his army Cato's son was serving
on his first campaign. When Popilius decided to disband one of his
legions, he discharged also young Cato, who was serving in that same
legion. But when the young man out of love for the service stayed on
in the field, his father wrote to Popilius to say that if he let him
stay in the army, he should swear him into service with a new oath of
allegiance, for in view of the voidance of his former oath he could
not legally fight the foe. So extremely scrupulous was the observance
of the laws in regard to the

37 conduct of war. There is extant, too, a letter of the elder Marcus
Cato to his son Marcus, in which he writes that he has heard that the
youth has been discharged by the consul,/a when he was serving in
Macedonia in the war with Perseus. He warns him, therefore, to be
careful not to go into battle; for, he says, the man who is not
legally a soldier has no right to be fighting the foe. XII. This also
I observe that he who would properly have been called "a fighting
enemy" (perduyellis) was called "a guest" (hostis+), thus relieving
the ugliness of the fact by a softened expression; for "enemy"
(hostis) meant to our ancestors what we now call "stranger
"(peregrinus). This is proved by the usage in the Twelve Tables: "Or a
day fixed for trial with a stranger" (hostis). And again: "Right of
ownership is inalienable for ever in dealings with a stranger"
(hostis). What can exceed such charity, when he with whom one is at
war is called by so gentle a name? And yet long lapse of time has
given that word a harsher meaning: for it has lost its signification
of "stranger" and has taken on the technical connotation of "an enemy
under arms."

38 But when a war is fought out for supremacy and when glory is the
object of war, it must still not fail to start from the same motives
which I said a moment ago were the only righteous grounds for going to
war. But those wars which have glory for their end must be carried on
with less bitterness. For we contend, for example, with a
fellow-citizen in one way, if he is a personal enemy, in another, if
he is a rival: with the rival it is a struggle for office and
position, with the enemy for life and honour. So with the Celtiberians
and the Cimbrians we fought as with deadly enemies, not to determine
which should be supreme, but which should survive; but with the
Latins, Sabines, Samnites, Carthaginians, and Pyrrhus we fought for
supremacy. The Carthaginians violated treaties; Hannibal was cruel;
the others were more merciful. From Pyrrhus we have this famous speech
on the exchange of prisoners:

"Gold will I none, nor price shall ye give; for I ask none; Come, let
us not be chaff'rers of war, but warriors embattled.  Nay; let us
venture our lives, and the sword, not gold, weigh the outcome. Make we
the trial by valour in arms and see if Dame Fortune Wills it that ye
shall prevail or I, or what be her judgment.  Hear thou, too, this
word, good Fabricius: whose valour soever Spared hath been by the
fortune of war - their freedom I grant them.  Such my resolve. I give
and present them to you, my brave Romans; Take them back to their
homes; the great gods' blessings attend you."

A right kingly sentiment this and worthy a scion of the Aeacidae.

39 XIII. Again, if under stress of circumstance individuals have made
any promise to the enemy, they are bound to keep their word even
then. For instance, in the First Punic War, when Regulus was taken
prisoner by the Carthaginians, he was sent to Rome on parole to
negotiate an exchange of prisoners; he came and, in the first place,
it was he that made the motion in the Sen ate that the prisoners
should not be restored; and in the second place, when his relatives
and friends would have kept him back, he chose to return to a death by
torture rather than prove false to his promise, though given to an
enemy.

40 And again in the Second Punic War, after the Battle of Cannae,
Hannibal sent to Rome ten Roman captives bound by an oath to return to
him, if they did not succeed in ransoming his prisoners; and as long
as any one of them lived, the censors kept them all degraded and
disfranchised, because they were guilty of perjury in not
returning. And they punished in like manner the one who had incurred
guilt by an evasion of his oath: with Hannibal's permission this man
left the camp and returned a litttle later on the pretext that he had
forgotten something or other; and then, when he left the camp the
second time, he claimed that he was released from the obligation of
his oath; and so he was, according to the letter of it, but not
according to the spirit. In the matter of a promise one must always
consider the meaning and not the mere words. Our forefathers have
given us another striking example of justice toward an enemy: when a
deserter from Pyrrhus promised the Senate to administer poison to the
king and thus work his death, the Senate and Gaius Fabricius delivered
the deserter up to Pyrrhus. Thus they stamped with their disapproval
the treacherous murder even of an enemy who was at once powerful,
unprovoked, aggressive, and successful.

41 With this I will close my discussion of the duties connected with
war. But let us remember that we must have regard for justice even
towards the humblest. Now the humblest station and the poorest fortune
are those of slaves; and they give us no bad rule who bid us treat our
slaves+ as we should our employees: they must be required to work;
they must be given their dues. While wrong may be done, then, in
either of two ways, that is, by force or by fraud, both are bestial:
fraud seems to belong to the cunning fox, force to the lion; both are
wholly unworthy of man, but fraud is the more contemptible. But of all
forms of injustice, none is more flagrant than that of thehypocrite+
who, at the very moment when he is most false, makes it his business
to appear virtuous. This must conclude our discussion of justice.

42 XIV. Next in order, as outlined above, let us speak of kindness and
generosity. Nothing appeals more to the best in human nature than
this, but it calls for the exercise of caution in many particulars: we
must, in the first place, see to it that our act of kindness shall not
prove an injury either to the object of our beneficence or to others;
in the second place, that it shall not be beyond our means; and
finally, that it shall be proportioned to the worthiness of the
recipient; for this is the corner-stone of justice; and by the
standard of justice all acts of kindness must be measured. For those
who confer a harmful favour upon someone whom they seemingly wish to
help are to be accounted not generous benefactors but dangerous
sycophants; and likewise those who injure one man, in order to be
generous to another, are guilty of the same injustice as if they
diverted to their own accounts the property of their neighbours.

43 Now, there are many - and especially those who are ambitious for
eminence and glory - who rob one to enrich another; and they expect to
be thought generous towards their friends, if they put them in the way
of getting rich, no matter by what means. Such conduct, however, is so
remote from moral duty that nothing can be more completely opposed to
duty. We must, therefore, take care to indulge only in such liberality
as will help our friends and hurt no one. The conveyance of property
by Lucius Sulla and Gaius Caesar from its rightful owners to the hands
of strangers should, for that reason, not be regarded as generosity;
for nothing is generous if it is not at the same time, just.

44 The second point for the exercise of caution was that our
beneficence should not exceed our means; for those who wish to be more
open-handed than their circumstances permit are guilty of two faults:
first they do wrong to their next of kin; for they transfer to
strangers property which would more justly be placed at their service
or bequeathed to them. And second, such generosity too often engenders
a passion for plundering and misappropriating property, in order to
supply the means for making large gifts. We may also observe that a
great many people do many things that seem to be inspired more by a
spirit of ostentation than by heart-felt kindness; for such people are
not really generous but are rather influenced by a sort of ambition to
make a show of being open-handed. Such a pose is nearer akin to
hypocrisy than to generosity or moral goodness.

45 The third rule laid down was that in acts of kindness we should
weigh with discrimination the worthiness of the object of our
benevolence; we should take into consideration his moral character,
his attitude toward us, the intimacy of his relation to us, and our
common social ties, as well as the services he has hitherto rendered
in our interest. It is to be desired that all these considerations
should be combined in the same person; if they are not, then the more
numerous and the more important considerations must have the greater
weight.

46 XV. Now, the men we live with are not perfect and ideally wise, but
men who do very well, if there be found in them but the semblance of
virtue. I therefore think that this is to be taken for granted that no
one should be entirely neglected who shows any trace of virtue; but
the more a man is endowed with these finer virtues - temperance,
self-control, and that very justice about which so much has already
been said-the more he deserves to be favoured. I do not mention
fortitude, for a courageous spirit in a man who has not attained
perfection and ideal wisdom is generally too impetuous; it is those
other virtues that seem more particularly to mark the good man. So
much in regard to the character of the object of our beneficence.

47 But as to the affection which anyone may have for us, it is the
first demand of duty that we do most for him who loves us most; but we
should measure affection, not like youngsters, by the ardour of its
passion, but rather by its strength and constancy {PlainDealer+}. But
if there shall be obligations already incurred, so that kindness is
not to begin with us, but to be requited, still greater diligence, it
seems, is called for; for no duty is more imperative that that of
proving one's gratitude+.

48 But if, as Hesiod bids, one is to repay with interest, if possible,
what one has borrowed in time of need, what, pray, ought we to do when
challenged by an unsought kindness? Shall we not imitate the fruitful
fields, which return more than they receive? For if we do not hesitate
to confer favours upon those who we hope will be of help to us, how
ought we to deal with those who have already helped us? For generosity
is of two kinds: doing a kindness and requiting one. Whether we do the
kindness or not is optional; but to fail to requite one is not
allowable to a good man, provided he can make the requital without
violating the rights of others.

49 Furthermore, we must make some discrimination between favours+
received; for, as a matter of course the greater the favour, the
greater is the obligation. But in deciding this we must above all give
due weight to the spirit, the devotion, the affection that prompted
the favour. For many people often do favours impulsively for everybody
without discrimination, prompted by a morbid sort of benevolence or by
a sudden impulse of the heart, shifting the wind. Such acts of
generosity are not to be so highly esteemed as those which are
performed with judgment deliberation, and mature consideration. But in
bestowing a kindness, as well as in making a requital, the first rule
of duty requires us - other things being equal - to lend assistance
preferably to people in proportion to their individual need. Most
people adopt the contrary course: they put themselves most eagerly at
the service of the one from whom they hope to receive the greatest
favours even though he has no need of their help.

50 XVI. The interests of society, however, and its common bonds will
be best conserved, if kindness be shown to each individual in
proportion to the closeness of his relationship. But it seems we must
trace back to their ultimate sources the principles of fellowship and
society that Nature has established among men. The first principle is
that which is found in the connection subsisting between all the
members of the human race; and that bond of connection is reason and
speech, which by the processes of teaching and learning, of
communicating, discussing, and reasoning associate men together and
unite them in a sort of natural fraternity. In no other particular are
we farther removed from the nature of beasts; for we admit that they
may have courage (horses and lions, for example); but we do not admit
that they have justice, equity, and goodness; for they are not endowed
with reason or speech.

51 This, then, is the most comprehensive bond that unites together men
as men and all to all; and under it the common right to all things
that Nature has produced for the common+ use of man is to be
maintained, with the understanding that, while everything assigned as
private property by the statutes and by civil law shall be so held as
prescribed by those same laws, everything else shall be regarded in
the light indicated by the Greek proverb: "Amongst friends all things
in common."/a Furthermore, we find the common property of all men in
things of the sort defined by Ennius; and, though restricted by him to
one instance, the principle may be applied very generally:

Who kindly sets a wand'rer on his way Does e'en as if he lit another's
lamp by his: No less shines his, when he his friend's hath lit.  In
this example he effectively teaches us all to bestow even upon a
stranger what it costs us nothing to give.

52 On this principle we have the following maxims: "Deny no one the
water that flows by;" "Let anyone who will take fire from our fire;"
"Honest counsel give to one who is in doubt;" {Lear+} -- a Plato,
Phaedr. 279C; Aristotle, Eth. VIII, 11; {2DRY 198- quotes Ovid Met]
for such acts are useful to the recipient and cause the giver no
loss. We should, therefore, adopt these principles and always be
contributing something to the common weal. But since the resources of
individuals are limited and the number of the needy is infinite, this
spirit of universal liberality must be regulated according to that
test of Ennius - "No less shines his" - in order that we may continue
to have the means for being generous to our friends.

53 XVII. Then, too, there are a great many degrees of closeness or
remoteness in human society. To proceed beyond the universal bond of
our common humanity, there is the closer one of belonging to the same
people, tribe, and tongue, by which men are very closely bound
together; it is a still closer relation to be citizens of the same
city-state; for fellow-citizens have much in common -forum, temples
colonnades, streets, statutes, laws, courts, rights of suffrage, to
say nothing of social and friendly circles and diverse business
relations with many. But a still closer social union exists between
kindred. Starting with that infinite bond of union of the human race
in general, the conception is now confined {family+}

54 to a small and narrow circle. For since the reproductive instinct
is by Nature's gift the common possession of all living creatures, the
first bond of union is that between husband and wife; the next, that
between parents and children; then we find one home, with everything
in common. And this is the foundation of civil government, the
nursery, as it were, of the state. Then follow the bonds between
brothers and sisters, and next those of first and then of second
cousins; and when they can no longer be sheltered under one roof, they
go out into other homes, as into colonies. Then follow between these
in turn, marriages and connections by marriage, and from these again a
new stock of relations; and from this propagation and after-growth
states have their beginnings. The bonds of common blood hold men

55 fast through good-will and affection; for it means much to share in
common the same family traditions the same forms of domestic worship,
and the same ancestral tombs. But of all the bonds of fellowship,
there is none more noble, none more powerful than when good men of
congenial character are joined in intimate friendship+; for really, if
we discover in another that moral goodness on which I dwell so much,
it attracts us and makes us friends to the one in whose character

56 it seems to dwell. And while every virtue attracts us and makes us
love those who seem to possess it, still justice and generosity do so
most of all. Nothing, moreover, is more conducive to love and intimacy
than compatibility of character in good men; for when two people have
the same ideals and the same tastes, it is a natural consequence that
each loves the other as himself; and the result is, as Pythagoras
requires of ideal friendship, that several are united in
one. {Portia+} Another strong bond of fellowship is effected by mutual
interchange of kind services; and as long as these kindnesses are
mutual and acceptable, those between whom they are interchanged are
united by the ties of an enduring intimacy. {Granville+}

57 But when with a rational spirit you have surveyed the whole field,
there is no social relation among them all more close, none more
close, none more dear than that which links each one of us with our
country+.  Parents are dear; dear are children, relatives, friends;
one native land embraces all our loves; and who that is true would
hesitate to give his life for her, if by his death he could render her
a service? So much the more execrable are those monsters who have torn
their fatherland to pieces with every form of outrage and who are/a
and have been/b engaged in compassing her utter destruction.

58 Now, if a contrast and comparison were to be made to find out where
most of our moral obligation is due, country would come first, and
parents; for their services have laid us under the heaviest
obligation; next come children and the whole family, who look to us
alone for support and can have no other protection; finally, our
kinsmen, with whom we live on good terms and with whom, for the most
part, our lot is one. All needful material assistance is, therefore,
due first of all to those whom I have named; but intimate relationship
of life and living, counsel, conversation, encouragement, comfort, and
sometimes even reproof flourish best in friendships. And that
friendship is sweetest which is cemented by congeniality of character.

59 XVIII But in the performance of all these duties we shall have to
consider what is most needful in each individual case and what each
individual person can or cannot procure without our help. In this way
we shall find that the claims of social relation,hip, in its various
degrees, are not identical with the the dictates of circumstances; for
there are obligations that are due to one individual rather than to
another: for example, one would sooner assist a neighbour in gathering
his harvest than either a brother or a friend; but should it be a caes
in court, one would defend a kinsman and a friend rather than a
neighbour. Such questions as these must, therefore, be taken into
consideration in every act of moral duty [and we must acquire the
habit and keep it up], in order to become good calculators of duty,
able by adding and subtracting to strike a balance correctly and find
out just how much is due to each individual.

60 But as neither physicians nor generals nor orators can achieve any
signal success without experience and practice, no matter how well
they may understand the theory of their profession, so the rules for
the discharge of duty are formulated, it is true, as I am doing now,
but a matter of such importance requires experience also and
practice. This must close our discussion of the ways in which moral
goodness, on which duty depends, is developed from those principles
which hold good in human society.

61 We must realize, however, that while we bave set down four cardinal
virtues from which as sources moral rectitude and moral duty emanate,
that achievement is most glorious in the eyes of the world which is
won with a spirit great, exalted, and superior to the vicissitudes of
earthly life. And so, when we wish to hurl a taunt, the very first to
rise to our lips is, if possible, something like this:

"For ye, young men, show a womanish+ soul, yon maiden a man's;"

and this:

"Thou son of Salmacis, win spoils that cost nor sweat nor blood."

When, on the other hand, we wish to pay a compliment, we somehow or
other praise in more eloquent strain the brave and noble work of some
great soul. Hence there is an open field for orators on the subjects
of Marathon, Salamis, Plataea, Thermopylae, and Leuctra, and hence our
own Cocles, the Decii, Gnaeus and Publius Scipio, Marcus Marcellus,
and countless others, and, above all, the Roman People as a nation are
celebrated for greatness of spirit. Their passion for military glory,
moreover, is shown in the fact that we see their statues usually in
soldier's garb.

62 XIX. But if the exaltation of spirit seen in times of danger and
toil is devoid of justice and fights for selfish ends instead of for
the common good, it is a vice; for not only has it no element of
virtue, but its nature is barbarous and revolting to all our finer
feelings. The Stoics, therefore, correctly define courage as "that
virtue which champions the cause of right." Accordingly, no one has
attained to true glory who has gained a reputation for courage by
treachery and cunning; for nothing that lacks justice can be morally
right.

63 This, then, is a fine saying of Plato's: "Not only must all
knowledge that is divorced from justice be called cunning rather than
wisdom," he says, "but even the courage that is prompt to face danger,
if it is inspired not by public spirit, but by its own selfish
purposes, should have the name of effrontery rather than of courage."
And so we demand that men who are courageous and high-souled shall at
the same time be good and straightforward, lovers of truth, and foes
to deception; for these qualities are the centre and soul of justice.

64 But the mischief is that from this exaltation and greatness of
spirit spring all too readily self-will and excessive lust for
power. For just as Plato tells us that the whole national character of
the Spartans was on fire with passion for victory, so, in the same
way, the more notable a man is for his greatness of spirit, the more
ambitious he is to be the foremost citizen, or, I should say rather,
to be sole ruler. But when one begins to aspire to pre-eminence, it is
difficult to preserve that spirit of fairness which is absolutely
essential to justice. The result is that such men do not allow
themselves to be constrained either by argument or by any public and
lawful authority; but they only too often prove to be bribers and
agitators in public life, seeking to obtain supreme power and to be
superiors through force rather than equals through justice. But the
greater the difficulty, the greater the glory; for no occasion arises
that can excuse a man for being guilty of injustice. {Hotspur+}

65 So then, not those who do injury but those who prevent it are to be
considered brave and courageous. Moreover, true and philosophic
greatness of spirit regards the moral goodness to which Nature most
aspires as consisting in deeds, not in fame, and prefers to be first
in reality rather than in name. And we must approve this view; for he
who depends upon the caprice of the ignorant rabble cannot be numbered
among the great. Then, too, the higher a man's ambition, the more
easily he is tempted to acts of injustice by his desire for fame. We
are now, to be sure, on very slippery ground; for scarcely can the man
be found who has passed through trials and encountered dangers and
does not then wish for glory as a reward for his achievements.

66 XX. The soul that is altogether courageous and great is marked
above all by two characteristics: one of these is indifference to
outward circumstances; for such a person cherishes the conviction that
nothing but moral goodness and propriety deserves to be either admired
or wished for or striven after, and that he ought not to be subject to
any man or any passion+ or any accident+ of fortune+. The second
characteristic is that, when the soul is disciplined in the way above
mentioned, one should do deeds not only great and in the highest
degree useful, but extremely arduous and laborious and fraught with
danger both to life and to many things that make life worth living.

67 All the glory and greatness and, I may add, all the usefulness of
these two characteristics of courage are centred in the latter; the
rational cause that makes men great, in the former. For it is the
former that contains the element that makes souls pre- eminent and
indifferent to worldly fortune. And this qualitity is distinguished by
two criteria: (1) if one account moral rectitude as the only good; and
(2) if one be free from all passion. For we must agree that it takes a
brave and heroic soul to hold as slight what most people think grand
and glorious, and to disregard it from fixed and settled
principles. And it requires strength of character and great
singlenesss of purpose to bear what seems painful, as it comes to pass
in many and various forms in human life, and to bear it so
unflinchingly as not to be shaken in the least from one's natural
state of the dignity of a

68 philosopher. {stoicism+} Moreover, it would be inconsistent for the
man who is not overcome by fear to be overcome by desire, or for the
man who has shown himself invincible to toil to be conquered by
pleasure. We must, therefore, not only avoid the latter, but also
beware of ambition for wealth; for there is nothing so characteristic
of narrowness and littleness of soul as the love of riches; and there
is nothing more honourable and noble than to be indifferent to money,
if one does not possess it, and to devote it to beneficence and
liberality+, if one does possess it. As I said before, we must also
beware of ambition for glory; for it robs us of liberty+, and in
defence of liberty a high-souled man should stake everything. And one
ought not to seek military authority; nay, rather it ought sometimes
to be declined,/a sometimes to be resigned./b

69 Again, we must keep ourselves free from every disturbing emotion,
not only from desire and fear, but also from excessive pain and
pleasure, and from anger+, so that we may enjoy that calm of soul and
freedom from care which bring both moral stability and dignity of
character. But there have been many and still are many who, while
pursuing that calm of soul of which I speak, have withdrawn from civic
duty and taken refuge in retirement. Among such have been found the
most famous and by far the foremost philosophers/c and certain other/d
earnest, thoughtful men who could not endure the conduct of either the
people or their leaders; some of them, too, lived in the country and
found their pleasure in the manage-

70 ment of their private estates. Such men have had the same aims as
kings - to suffer no want, to be subject to no authority, to enjoy
their liberty, that is, in its essence, to live just as they please.
XXI. So, while this desire is common to men of political ambitions and
men of retirement, of whom I have just spoken, the one class think
they can attain their end if they secure large means; the other, if
they are content with the little they have. And, in this matter,
neither way of thinking is altogether to be condemned; but the life of
retirement is easier and safer and at the same time less burdensome or
troublesome to others, while the career of those who apply themselves
to statecraft and to conducting great enterprises is more profitable
to mankind and contributes more to their own greatness and renown.

71 So perbaps those men of extraordinary genius who have devoted
themselves to learning must be excused for not taking part in public
affairs; likewise, those who from ill-health or for some still more
valid reason have retired from the service of the state and left to
others the opportunity and the glory of its administration. But if
those who have no such excuse profess a scorn for civil and military
offices, which most people admire, I think that this should be set
down not to their credit but to their discredit; for in so far as they
care little, as they say, for glory and count it as naught, it is
difficult not to sympathize with their attitude; in reality however,
they seem to dread the toil and trouble and also, perhaps, the
discredit and humiliation of political failure and defeat. {Prospero+}
For there are people who in opposite circumstances do not act
consistently: they have the utmost contempt for pleasure but in pain
they are too sensitive; they are indifferent to glory, but they are
crushed by disgrace and even in their inconsistency they show no great
consistency.

72 But those whom Nature has endowed with the capacity for
administering public affairs should put aside all hesitation, enter
the race for public office and take a hand in directing the
government; for in no other way can a government be administered or
greatness of spirit be made manifest. Statesmen too, no less than
philosophers - perhaps even more so -should carry with them that
greatness of spirit and indifference to outward circumstances to which
I so often refer, together with calm of soul and freedom from care, if
they are to be free from worries

73 and lead a dignified and self-consistent life. This is easier for
the philosophers; as their life is less exposed to the assaults of
fortune, their wants are fewer; and, if any misfortune overtakes them,
their fall is not so disastrous. Not without reason, therefore, are
stronger emotions aroused in those who engage in public life than in
those who live in retirement, and greater is their ambition for
success; the more, therefore, do they need to enjoy greatness of
spirit and freedom from annoying cares. If anyone is entering public
life, let him beware of thinking only of the honour that it brings;
but let him be sure also that he has the ability to succeed. At the
same time, let him take care not to lose heart too readily through
discouragement nor yet to be over-confident through ambition. In a
word, before undertaking any enterprise, careful preparation must be
made.

74 XXII. Most people think that the achievements of war are more
important than those of peace; but this opinion needs to be
corrected. For many men have sought occasions for war from the mere
ambition for fame. This is notably the case with men of great spirit
and natural ability, and it is the more likely to happen, if they are
adapted to a soldier's life and fond of warfare. But if we will face
the facts, we shall find that there have been many instances of
achievement in peace more important and no less renowned than in war.

75 However highly Themistocles, for example, may be extolled - and
deservedly - and however much more illustrious his name may be than
Solon's, and however much Salamis may be cited as witness of his most
glorious victory - a victory glorified above Solon's statesmanship in
instituting the Areopagus -yet Solon's achievement is not to be
accounted less illustrious than his. For Themistocles's victory served
the state once and only once; while Solon's work will be of service
for ever. For through his legislation the laws of the Athenians and
the institutions of their fathers are maintained. And while
Themistocles could not readily point to any instance in which he
himself had rendered assistance to the Areopagus, the Areopagus might
with justice assert that Themistocles had received assistance from it;
for the war was directed by the counsels of that senate which Solon
had created.

76 The same may be said of Pausanias and Lysander. Although it is
thought that it was by their achievements that Sparta gained her
supremacy, yet these are not even remotely to be compared with the
legislation and discipline of Lycurgus. Nay, rather, it was due to
these that Pausanias and Lysander had armies so brave and so well
disciplined. For my own part, I do not consider that Marcus Scaurus
was inferior to Gaius Marius, when I was a lad, or Quintus Cattilus to
Gnaeus Pompey, when I was engaged in public life. For arms are of
little value in the field unless there is wise counsel at home. So,
too, Africanus, though a great man and a soldier of extraordinary
ability, did no greater service to the state by destroying Numantia
than was done at the same time by Publius Nasica, though not then
clothed with official authority, by removing Tiberius Gracchus. This
deed does not, to be sure, belong wholly to the domain of civil
affairs; it partakes of the nature of war also, since it was effected
by violence; but it was, for all that, executed as a political measure
without the help of an army.

77 The whole truth, however, is in this verse, against which, I am
told, the malicious and envious are wont to rail:

Yield, ye arms, to the toga; to civic praises,/a ye laurels."/b

Not to mention other instances, did not arms yield to the toga, when I
was at the helm of state? For never was the republic in more serious
peril, never was peace more profound. Thus, as the result of my
counsels and my vigilance, their weapons slipped suddenly from the
hands of the most desperate traitors - dropped to the ground of their
own accord!  What achievement in war, then, was ever so great

78 What triumph can be compared with that? For I may boast to you, my
son Marcus; for to you belong the inheritance of that glory of mine
and the duty of imitating my deeds. And it was to me, too, that Gnaeus
Pompey, a hero crowned with the honour of war, paid this tribute in
the hearing of many, when he said that his third triumph would have
been gained in vain, if he were not to have through my services to the
state a place in which to celebrate it.  There are, therefore,
instances of civic courage that are not inferior to the courage of the
soldier. Nay, the former calls for even greater energy and greater
devotion than the latter.

79 XXIII. That moral goodness which we look for in a lofty,
high-minded spirit is secured, of course, by moral, not by physical,
strength. And yet the body must be trained and so discliplined that it
can obey the dictates of judgment and reason in attending to business
and in enduring toil. But that moral goodness which is our theme
depends wholly upon the thought and attention given to it by the
mind. And, in this way, the men who in a civil capacity direct the
affairs of the nation render no less important service than they who
conduct its wars: by their statesmanship oftentimes wars are either
averted or terminated; sometimes also they are declared. Upon Marcus
Cato's counsel, for example, the Third Punic War was undertaken, and
in its conduct his influence

80 was dominant, even after he was dead. And so diplomacy in the
friendly settlement of controversies is more desirable than courage in
settling them on the battlefield; but we must be careful not to take
that course merely for the sake of avoiding war rather than for the
sake of public expediency. War, however, should be undertaken in such
a way as to make it evident that it has no other object than to secure
peace. But it takes a brave and resolute spirit not to be disconcerted
in times of difficulty or ruffled and thrown off one's feet, as the
saying is, but to keep one's presence of mind and one's
self-possession and not to swerve from the path of reason.

81 Now all this requires great personal courage; but it calls also for
great intellectual ability by reflection to anticipate the future, to
discover some time in advance what may happen whether for good or for
ill, and what must be done in any possible event, and never to be
reduced to having to say, "I had not thought of that." These are the
activities that mark a spirit strong, high, and self-reliant in its
prudence and wisdom. But to mix rashly in the fray and to fight hand
to hand with the enemy is but a barbarous and brutish kind of
business. Yet when the stress of circumstances demands it, we must
gird on the sword and prefer death to slavery and disgrace.

82 XXIV. As to destroying and plundering cities, let me say that great
care should be taken that nothing be done in reckless cruelty or
wantonness. And it is great man's duty in troublous times to single
out the guilty for punishment, to spare the many, and in every turn of
fortune to hold to a true and honourable course. {PlainDealer+} For
whereas there are many, as I have said before, who place the
achievements of war above those of peace, so one may find many to whom
adventurous, hot-headed counsels seem more brilliant and more
impressive than calm and well-considered measures. {Hotspur+}

83 We must, of course, never be guilty of seeming cowardly and craven
in our avoidance of danger; but we must also beware of exposing
ourselves to danger needlessly. Nothing can be more foolhardy than
that. Accordingly, in encountering danger we should do as doctors do
in their practice: in light cases of illness they give mild treatment;
in cases of dangerous sickness they are compelled to apply hazardous
and even desperate remedies. It is, therefore, only a madman who, in a
calm, would pray for a storm; a wise man's way is, when the storm does
come, to withstand it with all the means at his command, and
especially, when the advantages to be expected in case of a successful
issue are greater than the hazards of the struggle. The dangers
attending great affairs of state fall sometimes upon those who
undertake them, sometimes upon the state. In carrying out such
enterprises, some run the risk of losing their lives, others their
reputation and the good-will of their fellow-citizens. It is our duty,
then, to be more ready to endanger our own than the public welfare and
to hazard honour and glory more readily than other advantages./a

84 Many, on the other hand, have been found who were ready to pour out
not only their money but their lives for their country and yet would
not consent to make even the slightest sacrifice of personal glory -
even though the interests of their country demanded it. For example,
when Callicratidas, as Spartan admiral in the Peloponnesian War, had
won many signal successes, he spoiled everything at the end by
refusing to listen to the proposal of those who thought he ought to
withdraw his fleet from the Arginusae and not to risk an engagement
with the Athenians. His answer to them was that "the Spartans could
build another fleet, if they lost that one, but he could not retreat
without dishonour to himself." And yet what he did dealt only a slight
blow to Sparta; there was another which proved disastrous, when
Cleombrotus in fear of criticism recklessly went into battle against
Epaminondas. In consequence of that, the Spartan power fell.  How much
better was the conduct of Quintus Maximus! Of him Ennius says: One man
- and he alone - restored our state by delaying. Not in the least did
fame with him take precedence of safety; Therefore now does his glory
shine bright, and it grows ever brighter. This sort of offence must be
avoided no less in political life. For there are men who for fear of
giving offence do not dare to express their honest opinion, no matter
how excellent.

85 XXV. Those who propose to take charge of the affairs of government
should not fail to remember two of Plato's rules: first, to keep the
good of the people so clearly in view that regardless of their own
interests they will make their every action conform to that; second,
to care for the welfare of the whole body politic and not in serving
the interests of some one party to betray the rest. For the
administration of the government, like the office of a trustee+ must
be conducted for the benefit of those entrusted to one's care, not of
those to whom it is entrusted. Now, those who care for the interests
of a part of the citizens and neglect another part, introduce into the
civil service a dangerous element - dissension and party strife. The
result is that some are found to be loyal supporters of the
democratic, others of the aristocratic party, and few of the nation as
a whole.

86 As a result of this party spirit bitter strife arose at Athens,/b
and in our own country not only dissensions/c but also disastrous
civil wars/d broke out.  All this the citizen who is patriotic, brave,
and worthy of a leading place in the state will shun with abhorrence;
he will dedicate himself unreservedly to his country+, without aiming
at influence or power for himself; and he will devote himself to the
state in its entirety in such a way as to further the interests of
all. Besides, he will not expose anyone to hatred or disrepute by
groundless charges. but he will surely cleave to justice and honour so
closely that he will submit to any loss, however heavy, rather than be
untrue to them, and will face death itself rather than renounce them.

87 A most wretched custom, assuredly, is our electioneering and
scrambling for office. Concerning this also we find a fine thought in
Plato: "Those who compete against one another," he says, "to see which
of two candidates shall administer the government, are like sailors
quarrelling as to which one of them shall do the steering." And he
likewise lays down the rule that we should regard only those as
adversaries who take up arms against the state, not those who strive
to have the government administered according to their
convictions. This was the spirit of the disagreement between Publius
Africanus and Quintus Metellus: there was in it no trace of rancour.

88 Neither must we listen to those who think that one should indulge
in violent anger against one's political enemies and imagine that such
is the attitude of a great-spirited, brave man. For nothing is more
commendable, nothing more becoming in a pre-eminently great man than
courtesy and forbearance. Indeed, in a free people, where all enjoy
equal rights before the law, we must school ourselves to affability
and what is called "mental poise";/a for if we are irritated when
people intrude upon us at unseasonable hours or make unreasonable
requests, we shall develop a sour, churlish temper, prejudicial to
ourselves and offensive to others. And yet gentleness of spirit and
forbearance are to be commended only with the understanding that
strictness may be exercised for the good of the state; for without
that, the government cannot be well administered. On the other hand,
if punishment or correction must be administered, it need not be
insulting; it ought to have regard to the welfare of the state, not to
the personal satisfaction of the man who administers the punishment or
reproof.

89 We should take care also that the punishment shall not be out of
proportion to the offence, and that some shall not be chastised for
the same fault for which others are not even called to account. In
administering punishment it is above all necessary to allow no trace
of anger+. For if any one proceeds in a passion+ to inflict
punishment, he will never observe that happy mean which lies between
excess and defect. This doctrine of the mean is approved by the
Peripatetics+ and wisely approved, if only they did not speak in
praise of anger and tell us that it is a gift bestowed on us by Nature
for a good purpose. But, in reality, anger is in every circumstance to
be eradicated; and it is to be desired that they who administer the
government should be like the laws, which are led to inflict
punishment not by wrath but by justice.

90 XXVI. Again, when fortune smiles and the stream of life flows
according to our wishes, let us diligently avoid all arrogance,
haughtiness, and pride. For it is as much a sign of weakness to give
way to one's feelings in success as it is in adversity. But it is a
fine thing to keep an unruffled temper, an unchanging mien, and the
same cast of countenance in every condition of life; this, history
tells us, was characteristic of Socrates and no less of Gaius
Laelius. Philip, king of Macedon, I observe, however surpassed by his
son in achievements and fame, was superior to him in affability and
refinement. Philip, accordingly, was always great; Alexander, often
infamously bad. There seems to be sound advice, therefore, in this
word of warning: "The higher we are placed, the more humbly should we
walk." Panaetius tells us that Africanus, his pupil and friend, used
to say: "As, when horses have become mettlesome and unmanageable on
account of their frequent participation in battles, their owners put
them in the hands of trainers to make them more tractable; so men, who
through prosperity have become restive and over self-confident, ought
to be put into the training-ring, so to speak, of reason and learning,
that they may be brought to comprehend the frailty of human affairs
and the fickleness of fortune+."

91 The greater our prosperity, moreover, the more should we seek the
counsel of friends, and the greater the heed that should be given to
their advice. Under such circumstances also we must beware of lending
an ear to sycophants or allowing them to impose upon us with their
flattery. For it is easy in this way to deceive ourselves, since we
thus come to think ourselves duly entitled to praise; and to this
frame of mind a thousand delusions may be traced, when men are puffed
up with conceit and expose themselves to ignominy and ridicule by
committing the most egregious blunders. So much for this subject.

92 To revert to the original question/a - we must decide that the most
important activities, those most indicative of a great spirit, are
performed by the men who direct the affairs of nations; for such
public activities have the widest scope and touch the lives of the
most people. But even in the life of retirement there are and there
have been many high-souled men who have been engaged in important
inquiries or embarked on most important enterprises and yet kept
themselves within the limits of their own affairs; or, taking a middle
course between philosophers on the one hand and statesmen on the
other, they were content with managing their own property - not
increasing it by any and every means nor debarring their kindred from
the enjoyment of it, but rather, if ever there were need, sharing it
with their friends and with the state. Only let it, in the first
place, be honestly acquired, by the use of no dishonest or fraudulent
means; let it, in the second place, increase by wisdom, industry, and
thrift; and, finally, let it be made available for the use of as many
as possible (if only they are worthy) and be at the service of
generosity and beneficence rather than of sensuality and excess. By
observing these rules, one may live in magnificence, dignity, and
independence, and yet in honour, truth and charity toward all.

93 XXVII. We have next to discuss the one remaining division of moral
rectitude. That is the one in which we find considerateness and
self-control, which give, as it were, a sort of polish to life; it
embraces also temperance, complete subjection of all the passions, and
moderation in all things. Under this head is further included what, in
Latin, may be called decorum/a (Propriety); for in Greek it is called
7rpf'7rO./a Such is its essential nature,

94 that it is inseparable from moral goodness; for what is proper is
morally right, and what is morally right is proper. The nature of the
difference between morality and propriety can be more easily felt than
expressed. For whatever propriety may be, it is manifested only when
there is pre-existing moral rectitude. And so, not only in this
division of moral rectitude which we have now to discuss but also in
the three preceding divisions, it is clearly brought out what
propriety is. For to employ reason and speech rationally, to do with
careful consideration whatever one does, and in everything to discern
the truth and to uphold it - that is proper. To be mistaken, on the
other hand, to miss the truth, to fall into error, to be led astray -
that is as improper as to be deranged and lose one's mind. And all
things just are proper; all things unjust, like all things immoral,
are improper. The relation of propriety to fortitude+ is similar. What
is done in a manly+ and courageous spirit seems becoming to a man and
proper; what is done in a contrary fashion is at once immoral and
improper.

95 This propriety, therefore, of which I am speaking belongs to each
division of moral rectitude; and its relation to the cardinal virtues
is so close, that it is perfectly self-evident and does not require
any abstruse process of reasoning to see it.  For F there is a certain
element of propriety perceptible in every act of moral rectitude; and
this can be separated from virtue theoretically better than it can be
practically. As comeliness and beauty of person are inseparable from
the notion of health, so this propriety of which we are speaking,
while in fact completely blended with virtue, is mentally and
theoretically distinguishable from it.

96 The classification of propriety, moreover, is twofold: (1) we
assume a general sort of propriety, which is found in moral goodness
as a whole; then (2) there is another propriety, subordinate to this,
which belongs to the several divisions of moral goodness. The former
is usually defined somewhat as follows: "Propriety is that which
harmonizes with man's superiority in those respects in which his
nature differs from that of the rest of the animal creation." And they
so define the special type of propriety which is subordinate to the
general notion, that they represent it to be that propriety which
harmonizes with Nature, in the sense that it manifestly embraces
temperance and self-control, together with a certain deportment such
as becomes a gentleman.

97 XXVIII. That this is the common acceptation of propriety we may
infer from that propriety which poets aim to secure. Concerning that,
I have occasion to say more in another connection. Now, we say that
the poets observe propriety, when every word or action is in accord
with each individual character. For example, if Aeacus or Minos
said. "Let them hate, if only they fear," or: "The father is himself
his children's tomb," that would seem improper, because we are told
that they were just men. But when Atreus speaks those lines, they call
forth applause; for the sentiment is in keeping with the
character. But it will rest with the poets to decide, according to the
individual characters, what is proper for each; but to us Nature
herself has assigned a character of surpassing excellence, far
superior to that of all other living creatures, and in accordance with
that we shall have to decide what propriety requires.

98 The poets will observe, therefore, amid a great variety of
characters, what is suitable and proper for all - even for the
bad. But to us Nature has assigned the roles of steadfastness+,
{constantia+} temperance, self-control, and considerateness of others;
Nature also teaches us not to be careless in our behaviour towards our
fellow-men. Hence we may clearly see how wide is the application not
only of that propriety which is essential to moral rectitude in
general, but also of the special propriety which is displayed in each
particular subdivision of virtue. For, as physical beauty with
harmonious symmetry of the limbs engages the attention and delights
the eye, for the very reason that all the parts combine in harmony and
grace, so this propriety, which shines out in our conduct, engages the
approbation of our fellow-men by the order, consistency, and
self-control it imposes upon every word and deed.

99 We should, therefore, in our dealings with people show what I may
almost call reverence toward all men - not only toward the men who are
the best, but toward others as well. For indifference to public
opinion implies not merely self-sufficiency, but even total lack of
principle. {affability+} There is, too, a difference be- tween justice
and considerateness in one's relations to one's fellow-men. It is the
function of justice not to do wrong to one's fellow-men; of
considerateness, not to wound their feelings; and in this the essence
of propriety is best seen. With the foregoing exposition, I think it
is clear what the nature is of what we term propriety.

100 Further, as to the duty which has its source in propriety, the
first road on which it conducts us leads to harmony with Nature and
the faithful observance of her laws. If we follow Nature as our guide,
we shall never go astray, but we shall be pursuing that which is in
its nature clear-sighted and penetrating (Wisdom), that which is
adapted to promote and strengthen society (Justice), and that which is
strong and courageous (Fortitude). But the very essence of propriety
is found in the division of virtue which is now under discussion
(Temperance). For it is only when they agree with Nature's laws that
we should give our approval to the movements not only of the body, but
still more of the spirit.

101 Now we find that the essential activity of the spirit is twofold:
one force is appetite (that is, 6pli, in Greek), which impels a man
this way and that; the other is reason, which teaches and explains
what should be done and what should be left undone. The result is that
reason+ commands, appetite+ obeys.  XXIX. Again, every action ought to
be free from undue haste or carelessness; neither ought we to do
anything for which we cannot assign a reasonable motive; for in these
words we have practically a definition of duty.

102 The appetites, moreover, must be made to obey 
the reins of reason and neither allowed to run ahead of it nor from
listlessness or indolence to lag behind; but people should enjoy calm
of soul and be free from every sort of passion+. As a result strength
of character and self-control will shine forth in all their
lustre. For when appetites overstep their bounds and, galloping away,
so to speak, whether in desire or aversion, are not well held in hand
by reason, they clearly overleap all bound and measure; for they throw
obedience off and leave it behind and refuse to obey the reins of
reason, to which they are subject by Nature's laws. And not only minds
but bodies as well are disordered by such appetites. We need only to
look at the faces of men in a rage+ or under the influence of some
passion or fear or beside themselves with extravagant joy: in every
instance their features, voices, motions, attitudes undergo a change.

103 From all this - to return to our sketch of duty - we see that all
the appetites must be controlled and calmed and that we must take
infinite pains not to do anything from mere impulse or at random,
without due consideration and care. {Lear+} For Nature has not brought
us into the world to act as if we were created for play or jest, but
rather for earnestness and for some more serious and important
pursuits. We may, of course, indulge in sport and jest, but in the
same way as we enjoy sleep or other relaxations, and only when we have
satisfied the claims of our earnest, serious tasks. Further than that,
the manner of jesting+ itself ought not to be extravagant or
immoderate, but refined and witty. For as we do not grant our children
unlimited licence to play, but only such freedom as is not
incompatible with good conduct, so even in our jesting let the light

104 of a pure character shine forth. There are, generally speaking,
two sorts of jest: the one, coarse, rude, vicious, indecent; the
other, refined, polite, clever, witty. With this latter sort not only
our own Plautus and the Old Comedy of Athens, but also the books of
Socratic philosophy abound; and we have many witty sayings of many men
- like those collected by old Cato under the title ofBons Mots (or
Apophthegms) So the distinction between the elegant and the vulgar
jest is an easy matter: the one kind, if well timed (for instance, in
hours of mental relaxation), is becoming to the most dignified person;
the other is unfit for any gentleman, if the subject is indecent and
the words obscene. Then, too, certain bounds must be observed in our
amusements and we must be careful not to carry things too far and,
swept away by our passions, lapse into some shameful excess. Our
Campus, however, and the amusements of the chase are examples of
wholesome recreation.

105 XXX. But it is essential to every inquiry about duty that we keep
before our eyes how far superior man is by nature to cattle and other
beasts: they have no thought except for sensual pleasure and this they
are impelled by every instinct to seek; but man's mind is nurtured by
study and meditation; he is always either investigating or doing, and
he is captivated by the pleasure of seeing and hearing. Nay, even if a
man is more than ordinarily inclined to sensual pleasures, provided,
of course, that he be not quite on a level with the beasts of the
field (for some people are men only in name,, not in fact) - if, I
say, he is a little too susceptible to the attractions of pleasure, he
hides the fact, however much he may be caught in its toils, and for
very shame conceals his appetite.

106 From this we see that sensual pleasure is quite unworthy of the
dignity of man and that we ought to despise it and cast it from us;
but if someone should be found who sets some value upon sensual
gratification, he must keep strictly within the limits of moderate
indulgence. One's physical comforts and wants, therefore, should be
ordered according to the demands of health and strength, not according
to the calls of pleasure. And if we will only bear in mind the
superiority and dignity of our nature, we shall realize how wrong it
is to abandon ourselves to excess and to live in luxury and
voluptuousness, and how right it is to live in thrift,
self-denial,simplicity+, and sobriety.

107 We must realize also that we are invested by Nature with two
characters, as it were: one of these is universal, arising from the
fact of our being all alike endowed with reason and with that
superiority which lifts us above the brute. From this all morality and
propriety are derived, and upon it depends the rational method of
ascertaining our duty. The other character is the one that is assigned
to individuals in particular. In the matter of physical endowment
there are great differences: some, we see, excel in speed for the
race, others in strength for wrestling; so in point of personal
appearance, some have stateliness, others comeliness.

108 Diversities of character are greater still. Lucius Crassus and
Lucius Philippus had a large fund of wit; Gaius Caesar, Lucius's son,
had a still richer fund and employed it with more studied purpose.
Contemporary with them, Marcus Scaurus and Marcus Drusus, the younger,
were examples of unusual seriousness; Gaius Laelius, of unbounded
jollity; while his intimate friend, Scipio, cherished more serious
ideals and lived a more austere life. Among the Greeks, history tells
us, Socrates was fascinating and witty, a genial conversationalist; he
was what the Greeks call Flpcov in every conversation, pretending to
need information and professing admiration for the wisdom of his
companion. Pythagoras and Pericles, on the other hand, reached the
heights of influence and power without any seasoning of
mirthfulness. We read that Hannibal, among the Carthaginian generals,
and Quintus Maximus, among our own, were shrewd and ready at
concealing their plans, covering up their tracks, disguising their
movements, laying stratagems, forestalling the enemy's designs. In
these qualities the Greeks rank Themistocles and Jason of Pherae above
all others. Especially crafty and shrewd was the device of Solon, who,
to make his own life safer and at the same time to do a considerably
larger service for his country, feigned insanity. {Hamlet+}

109 Then there are others, quite different from these, straightforward
and open, who think that nothing should be done by underhand means or
treachery. They are lovers of truth, haters of fraud. There are others
still who will stoop to anything, truckle to anybody, if only they may
gain their ends. Such, we saw, were Sulla and Marcus Crassus. The most
crafty and most persevering man of this type was Lysander of Sparta,
we are told; of the opposite type was Callicratidas, who succeeded
Lysander as admiral of the fleet. So we find that another, no matter
how eminent he may be, will condescend in social intercourse {Hal+} to
make himself appear but a very ordinary person. Such graciousness of
manner we have seen in the case of Catulus - both father and son - and
also of Quintus Mucius Mancia. I have heard from my elders that
Publius Scipio Nasica was another master of this art; but his father,
on the other hand - the man who punished Tiberius Gracchus for his
nefarious undertakings - had no such gracious manner in social
intercourse [ . . . ], and because of that very fact he rose to
greatness and fame. Countless other dissimilarities exist in natures
and characters, and they are not in the least to be criticized.

110 XXXI. Everybody, however, must resolutely hold fast to his own
peculiar gifts, in so far as they are peculiar only and not vicious,
in order that propriety, which is the object of our inquiry, may the
more easily be secured. For we must so act as not to oppose the
universal laws of human nature, but, while safeguarding those, to
follow the bent of our own particular nature; and even if other
careers should be better and nobler, we may still regulate our own
pursuits by the standard of our own nature. For it is of no avail to
fight against one's nature or to aim at what is impossible of
attainment. From this fact the nature of that propriety defined above
comes into still clearer light, inasmuch as nothing is proper that
"goes against the grain," as the saying is-that is, if it is in direct
opposition to one's natural genius.

111 If there is any such thing as propriety at all, it can be nothing
more than uniform consistency in the course of our life as a whole and
all its individual actions. And this uniform consistency one could not
maintain by copying the personal traits of others and eliminating
one's own. For as we ought to employ our mother-tongue, lest, like
certain people who are continually dragging in Greek words, we draw
well-deserved ridicule upon ourselves, so we ought not to introduce
anything foreign into our

112 actions or our life in general. {PlainDealer+} Indeed, such
diversity of character carries with it so great significance that
suicide may be for one man a duty, for another [under the same
circumstances] a crime. Did Marcus Cato find himself in one
predicament, and were the others, who surrendered to Caesar in Africa,
in another? And yet, perhaps, they would have been condemned, if they
had taken their lives; for their mode of life had been less austere
and their characters more pliable. But Cato had been endowed by nature
with an austerity beyond belief, and he himself had strengthened it by
unswerving consistency {constantia+} and had remained ever true to his
purpose and fixed resolve; and it was for him to die rather than to
look upon the face of a tyrant.

113 How much Ulysses endured on those long wanderings, when he
submitted to the service even of women (if Circe and Calypso may be
called women) and strove in every word to be courteous and complaisant
to all! And, arrived at home, he brooked even the insults of his
men-servants and maidservants, in order to attain in the end the
object of his desire. But Ajax, with the temper he is represented as
having, would have chosen to meet death a thousand times rather that
it is each man's duty to weigh well what are his own peculiar traits
of character, to regulate these properly, and not to wish to try how
another man's would suit him. For the more peculiarly his own a man's
character is, the better it fits him.

114 Everyone, therefore, should make a proper estimate of his own
natural ability and show himself a critical judge of his own merits
and defects; in this respect we should not let actors display more
practical wisdom than we have. They select, not the best plays, but
the ones best suited to their talents. Those who rely most upon the
quality of their voice take the Epigoni and the Medus; those who place
more stress upon the action choose the Melanippa and the
Clytaemnestra; Rupilius, whom I remember, always played in the
Antiope, Aesopus rarely in the Ajax. Shall a player have regard to
this in choosing his role upon the stage, and a wise man fail to do so
in selecting his part in life? We shall, therefore, work to the best
advantage in that role to which we are best adapted. But if at some
time stress of circumstances shall thrust us aside into some
uncongenial part, we must devote to it all possible thought, practice,
and pains, that we may be able to perform it, if not with propriety,
at least with as little impropriety as possible; and we need not
strive so hard to attain to points of excellence that have not been
vouchsafed to us as to correct the faults we have.

115 XXXII. To the two above- mentioned characters is added a third,
which some chance or some circumstance imposes, and a fourth also,
which we assume by our own deliberate choice. Regal powers and
military commands, nobility of birth and political office, wealth and
influence, and their opposites depend upon chance and are, therefore,
controlled by circumstances. But what role we ourselves may choose to
sustain is decided by our own free choice. And so some turn to
philosophy, others to the civil law, and still others to oratory,
while in case of the virtues themselves one man prefers to excel in
one, another in another.

116 They, whose fathers or forefathers have achieved distinction in
some particular field, often strive to attain eminence in the same
department of service: for example, Quintus, the son of Publius
Mucius, in the law; Africanus, the son of Paulus, in the army. And to
that distinction which they have severally inherited from their
fathers some have added lustre of their own; for example, that same
Africanus, who crowned his inherited military glory with his own
eloquence. Timotheus, Conon's son, did the same: he proved himself not
inferior to his father in military renown and added to that
distinction the glory of culture and intellectual power. It happens
sometimes, too, that a man declines to follow in the footsteps of his
fathers and pursues a vocation of his own. And in such callings those
very frequently achieve signal success who, though sprung from humble
parentage, have set their aims high.

117 All these questions, therefore, we ought to bear thoughtfully in
mind, when we inquire into the nature of propriety; but above all we
must decide who and what manner of men we wish to be and what calling
in life we would follow; and this is the most difficult problem in the
world. For it is in the years of early youth, when our judgement is
most immature, that each of us decides that his calling in life shall
be that to which he has taken a special liking. And thus he becomes
engaged in some particular calling and career in life, before he is
fit to decide intelligently what is best for him.

118 For we cannot all have the experience of Hercules, as we find it
in the words of Prodicus in Xenophon; "When Hercules was just coming
into youth's estate (the time which Nature has appointed unto every
man for choosing the path of life on which he would enter), he went
out into a desert place. And as he saw two paths, the path of Pleasure
and the path of Virtue, he sat down and debated long and earnestly
which one it were better for him to take." This might, perhaps, happen
to a Hercules, "scion of the seed of Jove"; but it cannot well happen
to us; for we copy each the model he fancies, and we are constrained
to adopt their pursuits and vocations. But usually, we are so imbued
with the teachings of our parents, that we fall irresistibly into
their manners and customs. Others drift with the current of popular
opinion and make especial choice of those callings which the majority
find most attractive. Some, however, as the result either of some
happy fortune or of natural ability, enter upon the right path of
life, without parental guidance.

119 XXXIII. There is one class of people that is very rarely met with:
it is composed of those who are endowed with marked natural ability,
or exceptional advantages of education and culture, or both, and who
also have time to consider carefully what career in life they prefer
to follow; and in this deliberation the decision must turn wholly upon
each individual's natural bent. For we try to find out from each one's
native disposition, as was said above, just what is proper for him;
and this we require not only in case of each individual act but which
still greater care must be given, In order that we may be true to
ourselves throughout all our lives and not falter in the discharge of
any duty.

120 But since the most powerful influence in the choice of a career is
exerted by Nature, and the next most powerful by Fortune, we must, of
course, take account of them both in deciding upon our calling in
life; but, of the two, Nature claims the more attention. For Nature is
so much more stable and steadfast, that for Fortune to come into
conflict with Nature seems like a combat between a mortal and a
goddess. If, therefore, he has conformed his whole plan of life to the
kind of nature that is his (that is, his better nature), let him go on
with it consistently - for that is the essence of Propriety unless,
perchance, he should discover that he has made a mistake in choosing
his life work. If this should happen (and it can easily happen), he
must change his vocation and mode of life. If circumstances favour
such change, it will be effected with greater ease and convenience. If
not, it must be made gradually, step by step, just as, when
friendships become no longer pleasing or desirable, it is more proper
(so wise men think) to undo the bond

121 little by little than to sever it at a stroke. And when we have
once changed our calling in life, we must take all possible care to
make it clear that we have done so with good reason. But whereas I
said a moment ago that we have to follow in the steps of our fathers,
let me make the following exceptions: first, we need not imitate their
faults; second, we need not imitate certain other things, if our
nature does not permit such imitation; for example, the son of the
elder Africanus (that Scipio who adopted the Younger Africanus, the
son of Paulus) could not on account of ill-health be so much like his
father as Africanus had been like his. If, then, a man is unable to
conduct cases at the bar or to hold the people spell-bound with his
eloquence or to conduct wars, still it will be his duty to practise
these other virtues, which are within his reach - justice,
good_faith+, generosity, temperance, self-control - that his
deficiencies in other respects may be less conspicuous. The noblest
heritage, however, that is handed down from fathers to children, and
one more precious than any inherited wealth, is a reputation for
virtue and worthy deeds; and to dishonour this must be branded as a
sin and a shame.

122 XXXIV. Since, too, the duties that properly belong to different
times of life are not the same, but some belong to the young, others
to those more advanced in years, a word must be said on this
distinction also. It is, then, the duty of a young man to show
deference to his elders and to attach himself to the best and most
approved of them, so as to receive the benefit of their counsel and
influence. For the inexperience of youth requires the practical wisdom
of age to strengthen and direct it. And this time of life is above all
to be protected against sensuality and trained to toil and endurance
of both mind and body, so as to be strong for active duty in military
and civil service. And even when they wish to relax their minds and
give themselves up to enjoyment they should beware of excesses and
bear in mind the rules of modesty. And this will be easier, if the
young are not unwilling to have their elders join them even in their
pleasures.

123 The old, on the other hand, should, it seems, have their physical
labours reduced; their mental activities should be actually
increased. They should endeavour, too, by means of their counsel and
practical wisdom to be of as much service as possible to their friends
and to the young, and above all to the state. But there is nothing
against which old age has to be more on its guard than against
surrendering to feebleness and idleness, while luxury, a vice in any
time of life, is in old age especially scandalous. But if excess in
sensual indulgence is added to luxurious living, it is a twofold evil;
for old age not only disgraces itself; it also serves to make the
excesses of the young more shameless.

124 At this point it is not at all irrelevant to discuss the duties of
magistrates+, of private individuals, [of native citizens,] and of
foreigners. It is, then, peculiarly the place of a magistrate to bear
in mind that he represents the state and that it is his duty to uphold
its honour and its dignity, to enforce the law, to dispense to all
their constitutional rights, and to remember that all this has been
committed to him as a sacred trust. The private individual ought
first, in private relations, to live on fair and equal terms with his
fellow-citizens, with a spirit neither servile and grovelling nor yet
domineering; and second, in matters pertaining to the state, to labour
for her peace and honour; for such a man we are accustomed to esteem
and call a good citizen.

125 As for the foreigner or the resident alien, it is his duty to
attend strictly to his own concerns, not to pry into other people's
business, and under no condition to meddle in the politics of a
country not his own. In this way I think we shall have a fairly, clear
view of our duties when the question arises what is proper and what is
appropriate to each character, circumstance, and age. But there is
nothing so essentially proper as to maintain consistency in th
performance of every act and in the conception of every plan.

126 XXXV. But the propriety to which I refer shows itself also in
every deed, in every word, even in every movement and attitude of the
body. And in outward, visible propriety there are three elements -
beauty, tact, and taste; these conceptions are difficult to express in
words, but it will be enough for my purpose if they are understood. In
these three elements is included also our concern for the good opinion
of those with whom and amongst whom we live. For these reasons I
should like to say a few words about this kind of propriety
also. First of all, Nature seems to have had a wonderful plan in the
construction of our bodies. Our face and our figure generally, in so
far as it has a comely appearance, she has placed in sight; but the
parts of the body that are given us only to serve the needs of Nature
and that would present an unsightly and unpleasant appearance she has
covered up and

127 concealed from view. Man's modesty+ has followed this careful
contrivance of Nature's; all right-minded people keep out of sight
what Nature has hidden and take pains to respond to Nature's demands
as privately as possible; and in the case of those parts of the body
which only serve Nature's needs, neither the parts nor the functions
are called by their real names. To perform these functions - if only
it be done in private - is nothing immoral; but to speak of them is
indecent. And so neither public performance of those acts nor vulgar
mention of them is free from indecency.

128 But we should give no heed to the Cynics (or to some Stoics who
are practically Cynics) who censure and ridicule us for holding that
the mere mention of some actions that are not immoral is shameful,
while other things that are immoral we call by their real
names. Robbery, fraud, and adultery, for example, are immoral in deed,
but it is not indecent to name them. To beget children in wedlock is
in deed morally right; to speak of it is indecent. And they assail
modesty with a great many other arguments to the same purport. But as
for us, let us follow Nature and shun everything that is offensive to
our eyes or our ears. So, in standing or walking, in sitting or
reclining, in our expression, our eyes, or the movements of our hands,
let us preserve what we have called "propriety."

129 In these matters we must avoid especially the two extremes - our
conduct and speech should not be effeminate+ and over-nice, on the one
hand, nor coarse and boorish, on the other. And we surely must not
admit that, while this rule applies to actors and orators, it is not
binding upon us. As for stage-people, their custom, because of its
traditional discipline, carries modesty to such a point that an actor
would never step out upon the stage without a breech-cloth on, for
fear he might make an improper exhibition, if by some accident certain
parts of his person should happen to become exposed. And in our own
custom grown sons do not bathe with their fathers, nor sons-in-law
with their fathers-in-law. We must, therefore, keep to the path of
this sort of modesty, especially when Nature is our teacher and guide.

130 XXXVI. Again, there are two orders of beauty: in the one,
loveliness predominates; in the other, dignity; of these, we ought to
regard loveliness as the attribute ofwoman+, and dignity as the
attribute of man. Therefore, let all finery not suitable to a man's
dignity be kept off his person, and let him guard against the like
fault in gesture and action. The manners taught in the palaestra,/a
for example, are often rather objectionable, and the gestures of
actors on the stage are not always free from affectation+; but simple,
unaffected manners are commendable in both instances
{PlainDealer+}. Now dignity of mien is also to be enhanced by a good
complexion; the complexion is the result of physical exercise. We must
besides present an appearance of neatness - not too punctilious or
exquisite, but just enough to avoid boorish and ill-bred
slovenliness. We must follow the same principle in regard to
dress+. In this, as in most things, the best rule is the golden mean.

131 We must be careful, too, not to fall into a habit of listless
sauntering in our gait, so as to look like carriers in festal
processions, or of hurrying too fast, when time presses. If we do
this, it puts us out of breath, our looks are changed, our features
distorted; and all this is clear evidence of a lack of poise. But it
is much more important that we succeed in keeping our mental
operations in harmony with Nature's laws. And we shall not fall in
this if we guard against violent excitement or depression, and if we
keep our minds intent on the observance of propriety.

---- Footnote ----

a. The Greek palaestra, a public school of wrestling and athletics,
adopted by the Romans became a place of exercise where the youth were
trained in gestures and attitudes, a nursery of foppish manners.

------------------

132 Our mental operations, moreover, are of two kinds: some have to do
with thought, others with impulse. Thought is occupied chiefly with
the discovery of truth; impulse prompts to action. We must be careful,
therefore, to employ our thoughts on themes as elevating as possible
and to keep our impulses under the control of reason.  XXXVII. The
power of speech in the attainment of propriety is great, and its
function is twofold: the first is oratory; the second,
conversation. Oratory is the kind of discourse to be employed in
pleadings in court and speeches in popular assemblies and in the
senate; conversation should find its natural place in social
gatherings, in informal discussions, and in intercourse with friends;
it should also seek admission at dinners. There are rules for oratory
laid down by rhetoricians; there are none for conversation; and yet I
do not know why there should not be. But where there are students to
learn, teachers are found; there are, however, none who make
conversation a subject of study, whereas pupils throng about the
rhetoricians everywhere. And yet the same rules that we have for words
and sentences in rhetoric will apply also to conversation.

133 Now since we have the voice as the organ of speech, we should aim
to secure two properties for it: that it be clear, and that it be
musical. We must, of course, look to Nature for both gifts. But
distinctness may be improved by practice; the musical qualities, by
imitating those who speak with smooth and articulate
enunciation. There masters of the Latin tongue. Their pronunciation
was charming; their words were neither mouthed nor mumbled: they
avoided both indistinctness and affectation; their voices were free
from strain, yet neither faint nor shrill. More copious was the speech
of Lucius Crassus and not less brilliant, but the reputation of the
two Catuli for eloquence was fully equal to his. But in wit and humour
Caesar, the elder Catulus's half- brother, surpassed them all: even at
the bar he would with his conversational style defeat other advocates
with their elaborate orations. {sprezzatura+} If, therefore, we are
aiming to secure propriety in every circumstance of life, we must
master all these points.

134 Conversation, then, in which the Socratics are the best models,
should have these qualities. It should be easy and not in the least
dogmatic; it should have the spice of wit. And the one who engages in
conversation should not debar others from participating in it, as if
he were entering upon a private monopoly; but, as in other things, so
in a general conversation he should think it not unfair for each to
have his turn. He should observe, first and foremost, what the subject
of conversation is. If it is grave, he should treat it with
seriousness; if humorous, with wit. And above all, he should be on the
watch that his conversation shall not betray some defect in his
character. This is most likely to occur, when people in jest or in
earnest take delight in making malicious and slanderous statements
about the absent, on purpose to injure their reputations.

135 The subjects of conversation are usually affairs of the home or
politics or the practice of the professions and learning. Accordingly,
if the talk begins to drift off to other channels, pains should be
taken to bring it back again to the matter in hand - but with due
consideration to the company present; for we are not all interested in
the same things at all times or in the same degree. We must observe,
too, how far the conversation is agreeable and, as it had a reason for
its beginning, so there should be a point at which to close it
tactfully.

136 XXXVIII. But as we have a most excellent rule for every phase of
life, to avoid exhibitions of passion, that is, mental excitement that
is excessive and uncontrolled by reason; so our conversation ought to
be free from such emotions: let there be no exhibition of anger+ or
inordinate desire, of indolence or indifference, or anything of the
kind. We must also take the greatest care to show courtesy and
consideration toward those with whom we converse. It may sometimes
happen that there is need of administering reproof. On such occasions
we should, perhaps, use a more emphatic tone of voice and more
forcible and severe terms and even assume an appearance of being
angry. But we shall have recourse to this sort of reproof, as we do to
cautery and amputation, rarely and reluctantly - never at all, unless
it is unavoidable and no other remedy can be discovered. We may seem
angry, but anger should be far from us; for in anger+ nothing right or
judi-

137 cious can be done. In most cases, we may apply a mild reproof, so
combined, however, with earnestness, that, while severity is shown,
offensive language is avoided. Nay more; we must show clearly that
even that very harsh The right course, moreover, even in our
differences with our bitterest enemies, is to maintain our dignity and
to repress our anger, even though we are treated outrageously. For
what is done under some degree of excitement cannot be done with
perfect self- respect or the approval of those who witness it. It is
bad taste also to talk about oneself - especially if what one says is
not true - and, amid the derision of one's hearers, to play
"TheBraggart+ Captain."/a

138 XXXIX. But since I am investigating this subject in all its phases
(at least, that is my purpose), I must discuss also what sort of house
a man of rank and station should, in my opinion, have. Its prime
object is serviceableness. To this the plan of the building should be
adapted; and yet careful attention should be paid to its convenience
and distinction. We have heard that Gnaeus Octavius - the first of
that family to be elected consul - distinguished himself by building
upon the Palatine an attractive and imposing house. Everybody went to
see it, and it was thought to have gained votes for the owner, a new
man, in his canvass for the consulship. That house Scaurus demolished,
and on its site he built an addition to his own house. Octavius, then,
was the first of his family to bring the honour of a consulship to his
house; Scaurus, thought the son of a very great and illustrious man,
brought to the same house, when enlarged, not only defeat, but dis-

139 grace and ruin. The truth is, a man's dignity may be enhanced by
the house he lives in, but not wholly secured by it; the owner should
bring honour to his -- a. Like Pyrgopolinices in the Miles Gloriosus
of Plautus, or Thraso in the Eunuchus of Terence.  house, not the
house to its owner. And, as in everything else a man must have regard
not for himself alone but for others also, so in the home of a
distinguished man, in which numerous guests must be entertained and
crowds of every sort of people received, care must be taken to have it
spacious. But if it is not frequented by visitors, if it has an air of
lonesomeness, a spacious palace often becomes a discredit to its
owner. This is sure to be the case if at some other time, when it had
a different owner, it used to be thronged. For it is unpleasant, when
passers-by remark:

O good old house, alas! how different 
The owner who now owneth thee!"

And in these times that may be said of many a house!/a

140 One must be careful, too, not to go beyond proper bounds in
expense and display, especially if one is building for oneself. For
much mischief is done in their way, if only in the example set. For
many people imitate zealously the foibles of the great, particularly
in this direction: for example, who copies the virtues of Lucius
Lucullus, excellent man that he was? But how many there are who have
copied the magnificence of his villas! Some limit should surely be set
to this tendency and it should be reduced at least to a standard of
moderation; and by that same standard of moderation+ the comforts and
wants of life generally should be regulated. But enough on this part
of my theme. --

141 In entering upon any course of action, then, we must hold fast to
three principles: first, that impulse shall obey reason; for there is
no better way than this to secure the observance of duties; second,
that we estimate carefully the importance of the object that we wish
to accomplish, so that neither more nor less care and attention may be
expended upon it than the case requires; the third principle is that
we be careful to observe moderation in all that is essential to the
outward appearance and dignity of a gentleman. Moreover, the best rule
for securing this is strictly to observe that propriety which we have
discussed above, and not to overstep it. Yet of these three
principles, the one of prime importance is to keep impulse subservient
to reason.

142 XL. Next, then, we must discuss orderliness of conduct and
seasonableness of occasions. These two qualities are embraced in that
science which the Greeks call ev'Tata - not that ev'Tata which we
translate with moderation [modestia], derived from moderate; but this
is the ev'Tata by which we understand orderly conduct. And so, if we
may call it also moderation, it is defined by the Stoics as follows:
"Moderation is the science of disposing aright everything that is done
or said." So the essence of orderliness and of right- placing, it
seems, will be the same; for orderliness they define also as "the
arrangement of things in their suitable and appropriate places." By
"place of action," moreover, they mean seasonableness of circumstance;
and the seasonable circumstance for an action is called in Greek
CVKatpt'a, in Latin occasio (occasion). So it comes about that in this
sense moderation, which we explain as I have indicated, is the science
of doing the right thing at the right time.

143 A similar definition can be given for prudence, of which I have
spoken in an early chapter. But in this part we are considering
temperance and self-control and related virtues. Accordingly, the
properties which, as we found, are peculiar to prudence were discussed
in their proper place, while those are to be discussed now which are
peculiar to these virtues of which we have for some time been speaking
and which relate to considerateness and to approbation of our fellow-
men.

144 Such orderliness of conduct is, therefore, to be observed, that
everything in the conduct of our life shall balance and harmonize, as
in a finished speech. For it is unbecoming and highly censurable, when
upon a serious theme, to introduce such jests as are proper at a
dinner, or any sort of loose talk. When Pericles was associated with
the poet Sophocles as his colleague in command and they had met to
confer about official business that concerned them both, a handsome
boy chanced to pass and Sophocles said: "Look, Pericles; what a pretty
boy!" How pertinent was Pericles's reply: "Hush, Sophocles, a general
should keep not only his hands but his eyes under control." And yet,
if Sophocles had made this same remark at a trial of athletes, he
would have incurred no just reprimand. So great is the significance of
both place and circumstance. For example, if anyone, while on a
journey or on a walk, should rehearse to himself a case which he is
preparing to conduct in court, or if he should under similar
circumstances apply his closest thought to some other subject, he
would not be open to censure: but if he should do that same thing at a
dinner, he would be thought ill-bred, because he ignored the
proprieties of the occasion.

145 But flagrant breaches of good breeding like singing in the streets
or any other gross misconduct, are easily apparent and do not call
especially for admonition and instruction. But we must even more
carefully avoid those seemingly trivial faults which pass unnoticed by
the many. However slightly out of tune a harp or flute may be, the
fault is still detected by a connoisseur; so we must be on the watch
lest haply something in our life be out of tune - nay, rather, far
greater is the need for painstaking, inasmuch as harmony+ of actions
is far better and far more important than harmony of sounds.

146 XLI. As, therefore, a musical ear detects even the slightest
falsity of tone in a harp, so we, if we wish to be keen and careful
observers of moral faults, shall often draw important conclusions from
trifles. We observe others and from a glance of the eyes, from a
contracting or relaxing of the brows, from an air of sadness, from an
outburst of joy, from a laugh, from speech from silence, from a
raising or lowering of the voice, and the like, we shall easily judge
which of our actions is proper, and which is out of accord with duty
and Nature. And, in the same manner, it is not a bad plan to judge of
the nature of our every action by studying others, that so we may
ourselves avoid anything that is unbecoming in them. For it happens
somehow or other that we detect another's failings more readily than
we do our own; and so in the school-room those pupils learn most
easily to do better whose faults the masters mimic for the sake of
correcting them.

147 Nor is it out of place in making a choice between duties involving
a doubt, to consult men of learning or practical wisdom and to
ascertain what their views are on any particular question of duty. For
the majority usually drift as the current of their own natural
inclinations carries them; and in deriving counsel from one of these,
we have to see not only what our adviser says, but also what he
thinks, and what his reasons are for thinking as he does. For, as
painters and sculptors and even poets, too, wish to have their works
reviewed by the public, in order that, if any point is generally
criticized, it may be improved; and as they try to discover both by
themselves and with the help of others what is wrong in their work; so
through consulting the judgment of others we find that there are many
things to be done and left undone, to be altered and improved.

148 But no rules need to be given about what is done in accordance
with the established customs and conventions of a community; for these
are in themselves rules; and no one ought to make the mistake of
supposing that, because Socrates or Aristippus did or said something
contrary to the manners and established customs of their city, he has
a right to do the same; it was only by reason of their great and
superhuman virtues that those famous men acquired this special
privilege. But the Cynics' whole system of philosophy must be
rejected, for it is inimical to moral sensibility, and without moral
sensibility nothing can be upright, nothing morally good.

149 It is, furthermore, our duty to honour and reverence those whose
lives are conspicuous for conduct in keeping with their high moral
standards, and who, as true patriots, have rendered or are now
rendering efficient service to their country, just as much as if they
were invested with some civil or military authority; it is our duty
also to show proper respect to old age, to yield precedence to
magistrates, to make a distinction between a fellow-citizen and a
foreigner, and, in the case of the foreigner himself, to discriminate
according to whether he has come in an official or a private
capacity. In a word, not to go into details, it is our duty to
respect, defend, and maintain the common+ bonds of union and
fellowship subsisting between all the members of the human race.

150 XLII. Now in regard to trades and other means of livelihood, which
ones are to be considered becoming to a gentleman and which ones are
vulgar, we have been taught, in general, as follows. First, those
means of livelihood are rejected as undesirable which incur people's
ill-will, as those of tax-gatherers and usurers. Unbecoming to a
gentleman, too, and vulgar are the means of livelihood of all hired
workmen whom we pay for mere manual labour, not for artistic skill;
for in their case the very wage they receive is a pledge of their
slavery+. Vulgar we must consider those also who buy from wholesale
merchants to retail immediately; for they would get no profits without
a great deal of downright lying; and verily, there is no action that
is meaner than misrepresentation. And all mechanics are engaged in
vulgar trades; for no workshop can have anything liberal about
it. Least respectable of all are those trades which cater for sensual
pleasures:

Fishmongers, butchers, cooks, and poulterers, 
And fishermen,

as Terence says. Add to these, if you please, the perfumers, dancers,
and the whole corps de ballet./a

151 But the professions in which either a higher degree of
intelligence is required or from which no small benefit to society is
derived - medicine and architecture, for example, and teaching - these
are proper for those whose social position they become. Trade+, if it
is on a small scale, is to be considered vulgar; but if wholesale and
on a large scale, importing large quantities from all parts of the
world and distributing to many without misrepresentation, it is not to
be greatly disparaged. Nay, it even seems to deserve the highest
respect, if those who are engaged in it, satiated, or rather, I should
say, satisfied with the fortunes they have made, make their way from
the port to a country estate, as they have often made it from the sea
into port. But of all the occupations by which gain is secured, none
is better than agriculture, none more profitable, none more
delightful, none more becoming to a freeman. But since I have
discussed this quite fully in my Cato Major, you will find there the
material that applies to this point.

152 XLIII. Now, I think I have explained fully enough how moral duties
are derived from the four divisions of moral rectitude. But between
those very actions which are morally right, a conflict and comparison
may frequently arise, as to which of two actions is morally better - a
point overlooked by Panaetius. For, since all moral rectitude springs
from four sources (one of which is prudence; the second, social
instinct; the third, courage; the fourth, tem a The ludus talarius was
a kind of low variety show, with loose songs and dances and bad music.
perance), it is often necessary in deciding a question of duty that
these virtues be weighed against one another.

153 My view, therefore, is that those duties are closer to Nature
which depend upon the social instinct {social_instinct+} than those
which depend upon knowledge; and this view can be confirmed by the
following argument: (1) suppose that a wise man should be vouchsafed
such a life that, with an abundance of everything pouring in upon him,
he might in perfect peace study and ponder over everything that is
worth knowing, still, if the solitude were so complete that he could
never see a human being, he would die. {Prospero+} And then, the
foremost of all virtues is wisdom -at the Greeks call O-Gota; for by
prudence, which they call opo'vqo-&s, we understand something else,
namely, the practical knowledge of things to be sought for and of
things to be avoided. (2) Again, that wisdom which I have given the
foremost place is the knowledge of things human and divine, which is
concerned also with the bonds of union between gods and men and the
relations of man to man. If wisdom is the most important of the
virtues, as it certainly is, it necessarily follows that that duty
which is connected with the social obligation is the most important
duty./a and (3) service+ is better than mere theoretical_knowledge+,
for the study and knowledge of the universe would somehow be lame and
defective, were no practical results to follow. Such results,
moreover, are best seen in the safeguarding of human interests. It is
essential, then, to human society; and it should, therefore, be ranked
above speculative knowledge.

---- Footnote ----

a. [Long note on C's confusion of wisdom and social instinct. I think
the editor is wrong - BRS]


154 Upon this all the best men agree, as they prove by their
conduct. For who is so absorbed in the investigation and study of
creation, but that, even though he were working and pondering over
tasks never so much worth mastering and even though he thought he
could number the stars and measure the length and breadth of the
universe, he would drop all those problems and cast them aside, if
word were suddenly brought to him of some critical peril to his
country, which he could relieve or repel? And he would do the same to
further the interests of parent or friend or to save him from
danger. {Prospero+}

155 From all this we conclude that the duties prescribed by justice
must be given precedence over the pursuit of knowledge and the duties
imposed by it; for the former concern the welfare of our fellow-men;
and nothing ought to be more sacred in men's eyes than that.
XLIV. And yet scholars, whose whole life and interests have been
devoted to the pursuit of knowledge, have not, after all, failed to
contribute to the advantages and blessings of mankind. For they have
trained many to be better citizens and to render larger service to
their country. So, for example, the Pythagorean Lysis taught
Epaminondas of Thebes; Plato, Dion of Syracuse; and many, many
others. As for me myself, whatever service I have rendered to my
country - if, indeed, I have rendered any - I came to my task trained
and equipped for it by my

156 teachers and what they taught me. And not only while present in
the flesh memorials of their learning they continue the same service
after they are dead. For they have overlooked no point that has a
bearing upon laws, customs or political science; in fact, they seem to
have devoted their retirement to the benefit of us who are engaged in
public business. The principal thing done, therefore, by those very
devotees of the pursuits of learning and science is to apply their own
practical wisdom and insight to the service of humanity. And for that
reason also much speaking (if only it contain wisdom) is better than
speculation never so profound without speech; for mere speculation is
self-centred, while speech extends its benefits to those with whom we
are united by the bonds of society. {Prospero+}

157 And again, as swarms of bees do not gather for the sake of making
honeycomb but make the honeycomb because they are gregarious by
nature, so human beings - and to a much higher degree - exercise their
skill together in action and thought because they are naturally
gregarious. And so, if that virtue {Justice+} which centres in the
safeguarding of human interests, that is, in the maintenance of human
society, were not to accompany the pursuit of knowledge, that
knowledge would seem isolated and barren of results. In the same way,
courage [Fortitude], if unrestrained by the uniting bonds of society,
would be but a sort of brutality and savagery. Hence it follows that
the claims of human society and the bonds that unite men together take
precedence of the pursuit of speculative knowledge.

158 And it is not true, as certain people maintain, that the bonds of
union in human society were instituted in order to provide for the
needs of daily life; for, they say, without the aid of others we could
not secure for ourselves or supply to others the things that Nature
requires; but if all that is essential to our wants and comfort were
supplied by some magic wand, as in the stories, then every man of
first-rate ability could drop all other responsibility and devote
himself exclusively to learning and study. Not at all. For he would
seek to escape from his loneliness and to find someone to share his
studies; he would wish to teach, as well as to learn; to hear, as well
as to speak. Every duty, therefore, that tends effectively to maintain
and safeguard human society should be given the preference over that
duty which arises from speculation and science alone. {Prospero+}

159 XLV. The following question should, perhaps, be asked: whether
this social instinct, which is the deepest feeling in our nature, is
always to have precedence over temperance and moderation also. I think
not. For there are some acts either so repulsive or so wicked, that a
wise man would not commit them, even to save his country. Posidonius
has made a large collection of them; but some of them are so shocking,
so indecent, that it seems immoral even to mention them. The wise man,
therefore, will not think of doing any such thing for the sake of his
country; no more will his country consent to have it done for her. But
the problem is the more easily disposed of because the occasion cannot
arise when it could be to the state's interest to have the wise man do
any of those things.

160 This, then, may be regarded as settled: in choosing between
conflicting duties, that class takes precedence which is demanded by
the interests of human society. [And this is the natural sequence; for
discreet action will presuppose learning and prac tical wisdom; it
follows, therefore, that discreet action is of more value than wise
(but inactive) speculation.] So much must suffice for this topic. For,
in its essence, it has been made so clear, that in determining a
question of duty it is not difficult to see which duty is to be
preferred to any other.  Moreover, even in the social relations
themselves there are gradations of duty so well defined that it can
easily be seen which duty takes precedence of any other: our first
duty is to the immortal gods; our second, to country; our third, to
parents; and so on, in a descending scale, to the rest.

161 From this brief discussion, then, it can be understood that people
are often in doubt not only whether an action is morally right or
wrong, but also, when a choice is offered between two moral actions,
which one is morally better. This point, as I remarked above, has been
overlooked by Panaetius. But let us now pass on to what remains.
