## 1

I. Cato, who was of about the same years, Marcus, my son, as that
Publius Scipio who first bore the surname of Africanus, has given us
the statement that Scipio used to say that he was never less idle than
when he had nothing to do and never less lonely than when he was
alone. An admirable sentiment, in truth, and becoming to a great and
wise man. It shows that even in his leisure hours his thoughts were
occupied with public business and that he used to commune with himself
when alone; and so not only was he never unoccupied, but he sometimes
had no need for company. The two conditions, then, that prompt others
to idleness - leisure and solitude - only spurred him on. I wish I
could say the same of myself and say it truly. But if by imitation I
cannot attain to such excellence of character, in aspiration, at all
events, I approach it as nearly as I can; for as I am kept by force of
armed treason away from practical politics and from my practice at the
bar, I am now leading a life of leisure. For that reason I have left
the city and, wandering in the country from place to place, I am often
alone.

## 2

But I should not compare this leisure of mine with that of
Africanus, nor this solitude with his. For he, to find leisure from
his splendid services to his country, used to take a vacation now and
then and to retreat from the assemblies and the throngs of men into
solitude, as, into a haven of rest. But my leisure is forced upon me
by want of public business, not prompted by any desire for repose. For
now that the senate has been abolished ana the courts have been
closed, what is there, in keeping with my self-respect, that I can do
either in the senate

## 3

chamber or in the forum? So, although I once lived amid throngs of
people and in the greatest publicity, I am now shunning the sight of
the miscreants with whom the world abounds and withdrawing from the
public eye as far as I may, and I am often alone. But I have learned
from philosophers that among evils one ought not only to choose the
least, but also to extract even from these any element of good that
they may contain. For that reason, I am turning my leisure to account
though it is not such repose as the man should be entitled to who once
brought the state repose from civil strife - and I am not letting this
solitude, which necessity and not my will imposes on me, find me idle.

## 4

And yet, in my judgment, Africanus earned the higher
praise. {public_service+} For no literary monuments of his genius have
been published, we have no work produced in his leisure hours, no
product of his solitude. From this fact we may safely infer that,
because of the activity of his mind and the study of those problems to
which he used to direct his thought, he was never unoccupied, never
lonely. But I have not strength of mind enough by means of silent
meditation to forget my solitude; and so I have turned all my
attention and endeavour to this kind of literary work. I have,
accordingly, written more in this short time since the downfall of the
republic than I did in the course of many years, while the republic
stood.

## 5

II. But, my dear Cicero, while the whole field of philosophy is
fertile and productive and no portion of it barren and waste, still no
part is richer or more fruitful than that which deals with moral
duties; for from these are derived the rules for leading a consistent
{constanter+} and moral life. And therefore, although you are, as I
trust, diligently studying and profiting by these precepts under the
direction of our friend Cratippus, the foremost philosopher of the
present age, I still think it well that your ears should be dinned
with such precepts from every side and that if it could be, they
should hear nothing else.

## 6

These precepts must be laid to heart by all who look forward to a
career of honour, and I am inclined to think that no one needs them
more than you. For you will have to fulfil the eager anticipation that
you will imitate my industry, the confident expectation that you will
emulate my course of political honours, and the hope that you will,
perhaps, rival my name and fame. You have, besides, incurred a heavy
responsibility on account of Athens and Cratippus: for, since you have
come to them for the purchase, as it were, of a store of liberal
culture, it would be a great discredit to you to return empty-handed,
thereby disgracing the high reputation of the city and of your
master. Therefore, put forth the best mental effort of which you are
capable; work as hard as you can (if learning is work rather than
pleasure); do your very best to succeed; and do not, when I have put
all the necessary means at your disposal, allow it to be said that you
have failed to do your part. But enough of this. For I have written
again and again for your encouragement. Let us now return to the
remaining section of our subject as outlined.

## 7

Panaetius, then, has given us what is unquestionably the most
thorough discussion of moral duties that we have, and I have followed
him in the main -but with slight modifications. He classifies under
three general heads the ethical problems which people are accustomed
to consider and weigh: first, the question whether the matter in hand
is morally right or morally wrong; second, whether it is expedient or
inexpedient; third, how a decision ought to be reached, in case that
which has the appearance of being morally right clashes with that
which seems to be expedient. He has treated the first two heads at
length in three books; but, while he has stated that he meant to
discuss the third head in its proper

## 8

turn, he has never fulfilled his promise. And I wonder the more at
this, because Posidonius, a pupil of his, records that Panaetius was
still alive thirty years after he published those three books. And I
am surprised that Posidonius has but briefly touched upon this subject
in certain memoirs of his, and especially, as he states that there is
no other topic in the whole range of philosophy so essentially
important as this.

## 9

Now, I cannot possibly accept the view of those who say that that
point was not overlooked but purposely omitted by Panaetius, and that
it was not one that ever needed discussion, because there never can be
such a thing as a conflict between expediency and moral rectitude. But
with regard to this assertion, the one point may admit of doubt -
whether that question which is third in but the other point is not
open to debate - that it was included in Panaetius's plan but left
unwritten. For, if a writer has finished two divisions of a threefold
subject, the third must necessarily remain for him to do. Besides, he
promises at the close of the third book that he will discuss this
division also in its

## 10

proper turn. We have also in Posidonius a competent witness to the
fact. He writes in one of his letters that Publius Rutilius Rufus, who
also was a pupil of Panaetius's, used to say that "as no painter had
been found to complete that part of the Venus of Cos which Apelles had
left unfinished (for the beauty of her face made hopeless any attempt
adequately to represent the rest of the figure), so no one, because of
the surpassing excellence of what Panaetius did complete, would
venture to supply what he had left undone."

## 11

III. In regard to Panaetius's real intentions, therefore, no doubt
can be entertained. But whether he was or was not justified in adding
this third division to the inquiry about duty may, perhaps, be a
matter for debate. For whether moral goodness is the only good, as the
Stoics believe, or whether, as your Peripatetics think, moral goodness
is in so far the highest good that everything else gathered together
into the opposing scale would have scarcely the slightest weight, it
is beyond question that expediency can never conflict with moral
rectitude. And so, we have heard, Socrates used to pronounce a curse
upon those who first drew a conceptual distinction between things
naturally inseparable. With this doctrine the Stoics are in agreement
in so far as they maintain that if anything is morally right, it is
expedient, and if anything is not morally right, it is not expedient.

## 12

But if Panaetius were the sort of man to say that virtue is worth
cultivating only because it is productive of advantage, as do certain
philosophers who measure the desirableness of things by the standard
of pleasure or of absence of pain, he might argue that expediency
sometimes clashes with moral rectitude. But since he is a man who
judges that the morally right is the only good, and that those things
which come in conflict with it have only the appearance of expediency
and cannot make life any better by their presence nor any worse by
their absence, it follows that he ought not to have raised a question
involving the weighing of what seems expedient against

## 13

what is morally right. Furthermore, when the Stoics speak of the
supreme good as "living conformably to Nature," they mean, as I take
it, something like this: that we are always to be in accord with
virtue, and from all other things that may be in harmony with Nature
to choose only such as are not incompatible with virtue. This being
so, some people are of the opinion that it was not right to introduce
this counterbalancing of right and expediency and that no practical
instruction should have been given on this question at all. And yet
moral goodness, in the true and proper sense of the term, is the
exclusive possession of the wise and can never be separated from
virtue; but those who have not perfect wisdom cannot possibly have
perfect moral goodness, but only a semblance

## 14

of it. And indeed these duties under discussion in these books the
Stoics call "mean duties";/a they are a common possession and have
wide application; and many people attain to the knowledge of them
through natural goodness of heart and through advancement in
learning. But that duty which those same Stoics call "right" is
perfect and absolute and "satisfies all the numbers,"/a as that same
school says, and is

## 15

attainable by none except the wise man. On the other hand, when
some act is performed in which we see "mean" duties manifested, that
is generally regarded as fully perfect, for the reason that the common
crowd does not, as a rule, comprehend how far it falls short of real
perfection; but, as far as their comprehension does go, they think
there is no deficiency. This same thing ordinarily occurs in the
estimation of poems, paintings, and a great many other works of art:
ordinary people enjoy and praise things that do not deserve
praise. The reason for this, I suppose, is that those productions have
some point of excellence which catches the fancy of the uneducated,
because these have not the ability to discover the points of weakness
in any particular piece of work before them. And so, when they are
instructed by experts, they readily abandon their former
opinion. IV. The performance of the duties, then, which I am
discussing in these books, is called by the Stoics a sort of
second-grade moral goodness, not the peculiar property of their wise
men, but shared by them with

## 16

all mankind. Accordingly, such duties appeal to all men who have a
natural disposition to virtue. And when the two Decii or the two
Scipios are mentioned as "brave men" or Fabricius {or Aristides+} is
called "the just," it is not at all that the former are quoted as
perfect models of courage or the latter as a perfect model of justice,
as if we had in one of them the ideal "wise man." For no one of them
was wise in the sense in which we wish to have "wise" understood;
neither were Marcus Cato and Gaius Laelius wise, though they were so
considered and were surnamed "the wise." Not even the famous Seven
were "wise." But because of their constant observance of "mean" duties
they bore a certain semblance and likeness to wise men.

## 17

For these reasons it is unlawful either to weigh true morality
against conflicting expediency, or common morality, which is
cultivated by those who wish to be considered good men, against what
is profitable; but we every-day people must observe and live up to
that moral right which comes within the range of our comprehension as
jealously as the truly wise men have to observe and live up to that
which is morally right in the technical and true sense of the
word. For otherwise we cannot maintain such progress as we have made
in the direction of virtue. So much for those who have won a
reputation for being good men by their careful observance of duty.

## 18

Those, on the other hand, who measure everything by a standard of
profits and personal advantage and refuse to have these outweighed by
considerations of moral rectitude are accustomed, in considering any
qestion, to weigh the morally right against what they think the
expedient; good men are not. And so I believe that when Panaetius
stated that people were accustomed to hesitate to do such weighing, he
meant precisely what he said - merely that "such was their custom,"
not that such was their duty. And he gave it no approval; for it is
most immoral to think more highly of the apparently, expdient than of
the morally right, or even to set these over against each other and to
hesitate to choose between them. What, then, is it that may sometimes
give room for a doubt and seem to call for consideration? It is, I
believe, when a question arises as to the char-

## 19

acter of an action under consideration. For it often happens, owing
to exceptional circumstances, that what is accustomed under ordinary
circumstances to be considered morally wrong is found not to be
morally wrong. For the sake of illustration, let us assume some
particular case that admits of wider application - what more atrocious
crime can there be than to kill a fellow-man, and especially an
intimate friend? But if anyone kills a tyrant - be he never so
intimate a friend - he has not laden his soul with guilt, has he? The
Roman People, at all events, are not of that opinion; for of all
glorious deeds they hold such an one to be the most noble. {tyrant+}
Has expediency, then, prevailed over moral rectitude? Not at all;
moral rectitude has gone hand in hand with expediency. Some general
rule, therefore, should be laid down to enable us to decide without
error, whenever what we call the expedient seems to clash with what we
feel to be morally right; and, if we follow that rule in comparing
courses of conduct, we shall never

## 20

swerve from the path of duty. That rule, moreover, shall be in
perfect harmony with the Stoics' system and doctrines. It is their
teachings that I am following in these books, and for these problems,
if conducted by those who consider whatever is morally right also
expedient and nothing expedient that is not at the same time morally
right, will be more illuminating than if conducted by those who think
that something not expedient may be morally right and that something
not morally right may be expedient. But our New Academy allows us wide
liberty, so that it is within my right to defend any theory that
presents itself to me as most probable. But to return to my rule.

## 21

V. Well then, for a man to take something from his neighbour and to
profit by his neighbour's loss is more contrary to Nature than is
death or poverty or pain or anything else that can affect either our
person or our property. For, in the first place, injustice is fatal to
social life and fellowship between man and man. For, if we are so
disposed that each, to gain some personal profit, will defraud or
injure his neighbour, then those bonds+ of human society, which are
most in accord with Nature's laws, must of

## 22

necessity be broken. Suppose, by way of comparison, that each one
of our bodily members should conceive this idea and imagine that it
could be strong and well if it should draw off to itself the health
and strength of its neighbouring member, the whole body would
necessarily be enfeebled and die; so, if each one of us should seize
upon the property of his neighbours and take from each whatever he
could appropriate to his own use, the bonds of human society must
inevitably be annihilated. For, without any conflict with Nature's
laws, it is granted that everybody may prefer to secure for himself
rather than for his neighbour what is essential for the conduct of
life; but Nature's laws do forbid us to increase our means, wealth,
and resources by despoiling others.

## 23

But this principle is established not by Nature's laws alone (that
is, by the common rules of equity), but also by the statutes of
particular communities, in accordance with which in individual states
the public interests are maintained. In all these it is with one
accord ordained that no man shall be allowed for the sake of his own
advantage to injure his neighbour. For it is to this that the laws
have regard; this is their intent, that the bonds of union between
citizens should not be impaired; and any attempt to destroy these
bonds is repressed by the penalty of death, exile, imprisonment, or
fine. Again, this principle follows much more effectually directly
from the Reason which is in Nature, which is the law of gods and
men. If anyone will hearken to that voice (and all will hearken to it
who wish to live in accord with Nature's laws), he will never be
guilty of coveting anything that is his neighbour's or of
appropriating to himself what he has taken

## 24

from his neighbour. Then, too, loftiness and greatness of spirit,
and courtesy, justice, and generosity are much more in harmony with
Nature than are selfish pleasure, riches, and life itself; but it
requires a great and lofty spirit to despise these latter and count
them as naught, when one weighs them over against the common
weal. [But for anyone to rob his neighbour for his own profit is more
contrary to Nature than death, pain, and the like.]

## 25

In like manner it is more in accord with Nature to emulate the
great Hercules and undergo the greatest toil and trouble for the sake
of aiding or saving the world, if possible, than to live in seclusion,
{Prospero+} not only free from all care, but revelling in pleasures
and abounding in wealth, while excelling others also in beauty and
strength. Thus Hercules denied himself and underwent toil and
tribulation for the world, and, out of gratitude for his services,
popular belief has given him a place in the council of the gods. The
better and more noble, therefore, the character with which a man is
endowed, the more does he prefer the life of service+ to the life of
pleasure. Whence it follows that man, if he is obedient to Nature,
cannot do harm to his fellow-man.

## 26

Finally, if a man wrongs his neighbour to gain some advantage for
himself he must either imagine that he is not acting in defiance of
Nature or he must believe that death, poverty, pain, or even the loss
of children, kinsmen, or friends, is more to be shunned than an act of
injustice against another. If he thinks he is not violating the laws
of Nature, when he wrongs his fellow-men, how is one to argue with the
individual who takes away from man all that makes him man? But if he
belleves that, while such a course should be avoided, the other
alternatives are much worse - namely, death, poverty, pain - he is
mistaken in thinking that any ills affecting either his person or his
property are more serious than those affecting his soul. VI. This,
then, ought to be the chief end of all men, to make the interest of
each individual and of the whole body politic identical. For, if the
individual appropriates to selfish ends what should be devoted to the
common good, all human fellowship will be destroyed.

## 27

And further, if Nature ordains that one man shall desire to promote
the interests of a fellow-man, whoever he may be, just because he is a
fellow-man, then it follows, in accordance with that same Nature, that
there are interests that all men have in common. And, if this is true,
we are all subject to one and the same law of Nature; and, if this
also is true, we are certainly forbidden by Nature's law to wrong our
neighbour. Now the first assumption is true;

## 28

therefore the conclusion is likewise true. For that is an absurd
position which is taken by some people, who say that they will not rob
a parent or a brother for their own gain, but that their relation to
the rest of their fellow-citizens is quite another thing. {gift+} Such
people contend in essence that they are bound to their fellow-citizens
by no mutual obligations, social ties, or common interests. This
attitude demolishes the whole structure of civil society. Others again
who say that regard should be had for the rights of fellow-citizens,
but not of foreigners, would destroy the universal brotherhood+ of
mankind; and, when this is annihilated, kindness, generosity,
goodness, and justice must utterly perish; and those who work all this
destruction must be considered as wickedly rebelling against the
immortal gods. For they uproot the fellowship which the gods have
established between human beings, and the closest bond of this
fellowship is the conviction that it is more repugnant to Nature for
man to rob a fellow-man for his own gain than to endure all possible
loss, whether to his property or to his person . . . or even to his
very soul-so far as these losses are not concerned with justice; a for
this virtue is the sovereign mistress and queen of all the virtues.

## 29

But, perhaps, someone may say: "Well, then, suppose a wise man were
starving to death, might he not take the bread of some perfectly
useless member of society?" [Not at all; for my life is not more
precious to me than that temper of soul which would keep me from doing
wrong to anybody for my own advantage.] "Or again; supposing a
righteous man were in a position to rob the cruel and inhuman tyrant,
Phalaris of clothing, might he not do it to keep himself from freezing
to death?"

## 30

These cases are very easy to decide. For, if merely, for one's own
benefit one were to take something away from a man, though he were a
perfectly worthless fellow, it would be an act of meanness and
contrary to Nature's law. But suppose one would be able, by remaining
alive, to render signal service to the state and to human society - if
from that motive one should take something from another, it would not
be a matter for censure. {Fenelon+} But, if such is not the case, each
one must bear his own burden of distress rather than rob a neighbour
of his rights. We are not to say, therefore, that sickness or want or
any evil of that sort is more repugnant to Nature than to covet and to
appropriate what is one's neighbour's; but we do maintain that
disregard of the common interests

## 31

is repugnant to Nature; for it is unjust. And therefore Nature's
law itself, which protects and conserves human interests, will surely
determine that a man who is wise, good, and brave, should in emergency
have the necessaries of life transferred to him from a person who is
idle and worthless; for the good man's death would be a heavy loss to
the common weal; only let him beware that self- esteem and self-love
do not find in such a transfer of possessions a pretext for
wrong-doing. {Oswald+} But, thus guided in his decision, the good man
will always perform his duty, promoting the general interests of human
society of which I am so fond of dwelling.

## 32

As for the case of Phalaris, a decision is quite simple: we have no
ties of fellowship with a tyrant+, but rather the bitterest feud; and
it is not opposed to Nature to rob, if one can, a man whom it is
morally right to kill; -nay, all that pestilent and abominable race
should be exterminated from human society. And this may be done by
proper measures; for, as certain members are amputated, if they show
signs themselves of being bloodless and virtually lifeless and thus
jeopardize the health of the other parts of the body, so those fierce
and savage monsters in human form should be cut off from what may be
called the common body of humanity. Of this sort are all those
problems in which we have to determine what moral duty is, as it
varies with varying circumstances.

## 33

VII. It is subjects of this sort that I believe Panaetius would
have followed up, had not some accident or business interfered with
his design. For the elucidation of these very questions there are in
his former books rules in plenty, from which one can learn what should
be avoided because of its immorality and what does not have to be
avoided for the reason that it is not immoral at all. We are now
putting the capstone, as it were, upon our structure, which is
unfinished, to be sure, but still almost completed; and, as
mathematicians make a practice of not demonstrating every proposition,
but require that certain axioms be assumed as true, in order more
easily to explain their meaning, so, my dear Cicero, I ask you to
assume with me, if you can, that nothing is worth the seeking for its
own sake except what is morally right. But if Cratippus/a does not
permit this assumption, you will still grant this at least - that what
is morally right is the object most worth the seeking for its own
sake. Either alternative is sufficient for my purposes; first the one
and then the other seems to me the more probable,, and, besides these,
there is no other alternative that seems probable at all./b

## 34

In the first place, I must undertake the defence of Panaetius on
this point; for he has said, not that the truly expedient could under
certain circumstances clash with the morally right (for he could not
have said that conscientiously /c), but only that what seemed
expedient could do so. For he often bears witness to the fact that
nothing is really expedient that is not at the same time morally
right, and nothing morally right that is not at the same time
expedient; and he says that no greater curse has ever assailed human
life than the doctrine of those who have separated these two
conceptions. And so he introduced an apparent, not a real, conflict
between them, not to the end that we should under certain
circumstances give the expedient preference over the moral, but that,
in case they ever should get in each other's way, we might decide
between them without uncertainty. This part, therefore, which was
passed over by Panaetius, I will carry to completion without any
auxiliaries, but fighting my own battle, as the saying is. For, of all
that has been worked out on this line since the time of Panaetius,
nothing that has come into my hands is at all satisfactory to me.

## 35

VIII. Now when we meet with expediency in some specious form or
other, we cannot help being influenced by it. But if upon closer
inspection one sees that there is some immorality connected with what
presents the appearance of expediency, then one is not necessarily to
sacrifice expediency but to recognize that there can be no expediency
where there is immorality. But if there is nothing so repugnant to
Nature as immorality (for Nature demands right and harmony and
consistency and abbors their opposites), and if nothing is so
thoroughly in accord with Nature as expediency, then surely expediency
and immorality cannot coexist in one and the same object. Again: if we
are born for moral rectitude and if that is either the only thing
worth seeking, as Zeno thought, or at least to be esteemed as
infinitely outweighing everything else, as Aristotle holds, then it
necessarily follows that the morally right is either the sole good or
the supreme good. Now, that which is good is certainly expedient;
consequently, that which is morally right is also expedient.

## 36

Thus it is the error of men who are not strictly upright to seize
upon something that seems to be expedient and straightway to
dissociate that from the question of moral right. To this error the
assassin's dagger, the poisoned cup, the forged wills owe their
origin; this gives rise to theft, embezzlement of public funds,
exploitation and plundering of provincials and citizens; this
engenders also the lust for excessive wealth, for despotic power, and
finally for making oneself king even in the midst of a free people;
and anything more atrocious or repulsive than such a passion cannot be
conceived. For with a false perspective they see the material rewards
but not the punishment -I do not mean the penalty of the law, which
they often escape, but the heaviest penalty of all, their own
demoralization+.

## 37

Away, then, with questioners of this sort (for their whole tribe is
wicked and ungodly), who stop to consider whether to pursue the course
which they see is morally right or to stain their hands with what they
know is crime. For there is guilt in their very deliberation, even
though they never reach the performance of the deed itself. Those
actions, therefore, should not be considered at all, the mere
consideration of which is itself morally wrong. Furthermore, in any
such consideration we must banish any vain hope and thought that our
action may be covered up and kept secret. For if we have only made
some real progress in the study of philosophy, we ought to be quite
convinced that, even though we may escape the eyes of gods and men, we
must still do nothing that savours of greed or of injustice, of lust
or of intemperance.

## 38

IX. By way of illustrating this truth Plato introduces the familiar
story of Gyges+: Once upon a time the earth opened in consequence of
heavy rains; Gyges went down into the chasm and saw, so the story
goes, a horse of bronze; in its side was a door. On opening this door
he saw the body of a dead man of enormous size with a gold ring upon
his finger. He removed this and put it on his own hand and then
repaired to an assembly of the shepherds, for he was a shepherd of the
king. As often as he turned the bezel of the ring inwards toward the
palm of his hand, he became invisible to everyone, while he himself
saw everything; but as often as he turned it back to its proper
position, he became visible again. And so, with the advantage which
the ring gave him, he debauched the queen, and with her assistance he
murdered his royal master and removed all those who he thought stood
in his way, without anyone's being able to detect him in his
crimes. Thus, by virtue of the ring, he shortly rose to be king of
Lydia. Now, suppose a wise man had just such a ring, he would not
imagine that he was free to do wrongly any more than if he did not
have it; for good men aim to secure not secrecy but the right.

## 39

And yet on this point certain philosophers, who are not at all
vicious but who are not very discerning, declare that the story
related by Plato is fictitious and imaginary. As if he affirmed that
it was actually true or even possible! But the force of the
illustration of the ring is this: if nobody were to know or even to
suspect the truth, when you do anything to gain riches or power or
sovereignty or sensual gratification - if your act should be hidden
for ever from the knowledge of gods and men, would you do it? The
condition, they say, is impossible. Of course it is. But my question
is, if that were possible which they declare to be impossible, what,
pray, would one do? They press their point with right boorish
obstinacy, they assert that it is impossible and insist upon it; they
refuse to see the meaning of my words, "if possible." For when we ask
what they would do, if they could escape detection, we are not asking
whether they can escape detection; but we put them as it were upon the
rack: should they answer that, if impunity were assured, they would do
what was most to their selfish interest, that would be a confession
that they are criminally minded; should they say that they would not
do so they would be granting that all things in and of themselves
immoral should be avoided. But let us now return to our theme.

## 40

X. Many cases oftentimes arise to perplex our minds with a specious
appearance of expediency: the question raised in these cases is not
whether moral rectitude is to be sacrificed to some considerable
advantage (for that would of course be wrong), but whether the
apparent advantage can be secured without moral wrong. When Brutus
deposed his colleague Collatinus from the consular office, his
treatment of him might have been thought unjust; for Collatinus had
been his associate, and had helped him with word and deed in driving
out the royal family. But when the leading men of the state had
determined that all the kindred of Superbus and the very name of the
Tarquins and every reminder of the monarchy should be obliterated,
then the course that was expedient - namely, to serve the country's
interests - was so pre-eminently right, that it was even Collatinus's
own duty to acquiesce in its justice. And so expediency gained the day
because of its moral rightness; for without moral rectitude there
could have been no possible expediency. Not so in the case of the
king/a who founded the

## 41

city: it was the specious appearance of expediency that actuated
him; and when he decided that it was more expedient for him to reign
alone than to share the throne with another, he slew his brother./b He
threw to the winds his brotherly affection and his human feelings, to
secure what seemed to him - but was not -expedient; and yet in defence
of his deed he offered the excuse about his wall - a specious show of
moral rectitude, neither reasonable nor adequate at all. He committed
a crime, therefore, with due respect to him let me say so, be he
Quirinus or Romulus./a

## 42

And yet we are not required to sacrifice our own interest and
surrender to others what we need for ourselves, but each one should
consider his own interests, as far as he may without injury to his
neighbour's. "When a man enters the foot- race," says Chrysippus with
his usual aptness, "it is his duty to put forth all his strength and
strive with all his might to win; but he ought never with his foot to
trip, or with his hand to foul a competitor. Thus in the stadium of
life, it is not unfair for anyone to seek to obtain what is needful
for his own advantage, but he has no right to wrest it from his
neighbour."

## 43

It is in the case of friendships, however, that men's conceptions
of duty are most confused; for it is a breach of duty either to fail
to do for a friend what one rightly can do, or to do for him what is
not right. But for our guidance in all such cases we have a rule that
is short and easy to master: apparent advantages - political
preferment, riches, sensual pleasures, and the like - should never be
preferred to the obligations of friendship+. But an upright man will,
never for a friend's sake do anything in violation of his country's
interests or his oath or his sacred honour, not even if he sits as
judge in a friend's case; for he lays aside the role of friend when he
assumes that of judge. Only so far will he make concessions to
friendship, that he will prefer his friend's side to be the juster one
and that he will set the time for presenting his case, as far as the
laws will allow, to suit his friend's convenience

## 44

But when he comes to pronounce the verdict under oath, he should
remember that he has God as his witness - that is, as I understand it,
his own conscience, than which God himself has bestowed upon man
nothing more divine. From this point of view it is a fine custom that
we have inherited from our forefathers (if we were only true to it
now), to appear to the juror with this formula - "to do what he can
consistently with his sacred honour." This form of appeal is in
keeping with what I said a moment ago would be morally right for a
judge to concede to friend. For supposing that we were bound to
everything that our friends desired, such relations would have to be
accounted not friendships but

## 45

conspiracies. But I am speaking here of ordinary friendships; for
among men who are ideally wise and perfect such situations cannot
arise. They say that Damon+ and Phintias, of the Pythagorean school,
enjoyed such ideally perfect friendship, that when the tyrant
Dionysius had appointed a day for the executing of one of them, and
the one who had been condemned to death requested a few days' respite
for the purpose of putting his loved ones in the care of friends, the
other became surety for his appearance, with the understanding that
his friend did not return, he himself should be put to death. And when
the friend returned on the day appointed, the tyrant in admiration for
their faithfulness begged that they would enrol him as a third partner
in their friendship.  moral rectitude prevail; and when in friendship
requests are submitted that are not morally right, let conscience and
scrupulous regard for the right take precedence of the obligations of
friendship. In this way we shall arrive at a proper choice between
conflicting duties - the subject of this part of our investigation.

## 46

XI. Through a specious appearance of expediency wrong is very often
committed in transactions between state and state, as by our own
country in the destruction of Corinth. A more cruel wrong was
perpetrated by the Athenians in decreeing that the Aeginetans, whose
strength lay in their navy, should have their thumbs cut off. This
seemed to be expedient; for Aegina was too grave a menace, as it was
close to the Piraeus. But no cruelty can be expedient; for cruelty is
most abhorrent to human

## 47

nature, whose lead we ought to follow. They, too, do wrong who
would debar foreigners from enjoying the advantages of their city and
would exclude them from its borders, as was done by Pennus in the time
of our fathers, and in recent times by Papius. It may not be right, of
course, for one who is not a citizen to exercise the rights and
privileges of citizenship; and the law on this point was secured by
two of our wisest consuls, Crassus and Scaevola. Still, to debar
foreigners from enjoying the advantages of the city is altogether
contrary to the laws of humanity. There are splendid examples in
history where the apparent expediency of the state has been set at
naught out of regard for moral rectitude. Our own country has many
instances to offer throughout her history, and especially in the
Second Punic War, when news came of the disaster at Cannae, Rome
displayed a loftier courage than ever she did in success; never a
trace of faint-heartedness, never a mention of making terms. The
influence of moral right is so potent, at it eclipses the specious
appearance of expediency.

## 48

When the Athenians could in no way stem the tide of the Persian
invasion and determined to abandon their city, bestow their wives and
children in safety at Troezen, embark upon their ships, and fight on
the sea for the freedom of Greece, a man named Cyrsilus proposed that
they should stay at home and open the gates of their city to
Xerxes. They stoned him to death for it. And yet he was working for
what he thought was expediency; but it was not - not at all, for it
clashed with moral rectitude.

## 49

After the victorious close of that war with Persia, Themistocles
announced in the Assembly that he had a plan for the welfare of the
state, but that it was not politic to let it be generally known. He
requested the people to appoint someone with whom he might discuss
it. They appointed Aristides.  Themistocles confided to him that the
Spartan fleet, which had been hauled up on shore at Gytheum, could be
secretly set on fire; this done, the Spartan power would inevitably be
crushed. When Aristides heard the plan, he came into the Assembly amid
the eager expectation of all and reported that the plan proposed by
Themistocles was in the highest degree expedient, but anything but
morally right. The result was that the Athenians concluded that what
was not morally ri whole proposition without even listening to
it. Their attitude was better than ours; for we let pirates go scot
free, while we make our allies pay tribute./a XII. Let it be set down
as an established principle, then, that what is morally wrong can
never be expedient - not even when one secures by means of it that
which one thinks expedient; for the mere act of thinking a course
expedient, when it is morally

## 50

wrong, is demoralizing. But, as I said above, cases often arise in
which expediency may seem to clash with moral rectitude; and so we
should examine carefully and see whether their conflict is inevitable
or whether they may be reconciled. The following are problems of this
sort: suppose, for example, a time of dearth and famine at Rhodes,
with provisions at fabulous prices; and suppose that an honest man has
imported a large cargo of grain from Alexandria and that to his
certain knowledge also several other importers have set sail from
Alexandria, and that on the voyage he has sighted their vessels laden
with grain and bound for Rhodes; is he to report the fact to the
Rhodians or is he to keep his own counsel and sell his own stock at
the highest market price? I am assuming the case of a virtuous,
upright man, and I am raising the question how a man would think and
reason who would not conceal the facts from the Rhodians if he thought
that it was immoral to do so, but who might be in doubt whether such
silence would really be immoral.

## 51

In deciding cases of this kind Diogenes of Babylonia, a great and
highly esteemed Stoic, consistently holds one view; his pupil
Antipater, a most profound scholar, holds another. According to
Antipater all the facts should be disclosed, that the buyer may

## 52

not be uninformed of any detail that the seller knows; according to
Diogenes the seller should declare any defects in his wares, in so far
as such a course is prescribed by the common law of the land; but for
the rest, since he has goods to sell, he may try to sell them to the
best possible advantage, provided he is guilty of no
misrepresentation.  "I have imported my stock," Diogenes's merchant
will say; "I have offered it for sale; I sell at a price no higher
than my competitors - perhaps even lower, when the market is
overstocked. Who is wronged?"  "What say you?" comes Antipater's
argument on the other side; "it is your duty to consider the interests
of your fellow- men and to serve society; you were brought into the
world under these conditions and have these inborn principles which
you are in duty bound to obey and follow, that your interest shall be
the interest of the community and conversely that the interest of the
community shall be your interest as well; will you, in view of all
these facts, conceal from your fellow- men what relief in plenteous
supplies is close at hand for them?"  "It is one thing to conceal,"
Diogenes will perhaps reply; not to reveal is quite a different
thing. At this present moment I am not concealing from you, even if I
am not revealing to you, the nature of gods or the highest good; and
to know these secrets would be of more advantage to you than to know
that the price of wheat was down. But I am under no obligation to tell
you everything that it may be to your interest to be told."

## 53

"Yea," Antipater will say, "but you are, as you must admit, if you
will only bethink you of the bonds of fellowship forged by Nature and
existing between man and man."  "I do not forget them," the other will
reply: but do you mean to say that those bonds of fellowship are such
that there is no such thing as private property? If that is the case,
we should not sell anything at all, but freely give everything away."
XIII. In this whole discussion, you see, no one says, "However wrong
morally this or that may be, still, since it is expedient, I will do
it"; but the one side asserts that a given act is expedient, without
being morally wrong, while the other insists that the act should not
be done, because it is morally wrong.

## 54

Suppose again that an honest man is offering a house for sale on
account of certain undesirable features of which he himself is aware
but which nobody else knows; suppose it is unsanitary, but has the
reputation of being healthful; suppose it is not generally known that
vermin are to be found in all the bedrooms; suppose, finally, that it
is built of unsound timber and likely to collapse, but that no one
knows about it except the owner; if the vendor does not tell the
purchaser these facts but sells him the house for far more than he
could reasonably have expected to get for it, I ask whether his
transaction is unjust or dishonourable.

## 55

"Yes," says Antipater, "it is; for to allow a purchaser to be hasty
in closing a deal and through mistak worse than refusing to set a man
on his way: it is deliberately leading a man astray."  "Can you say,"
answers Diogenes, "that he compelled you to purchase, when he did not
even advise it? He advertised for sale what he did not like; you
bought what you did like. If people are not considered guilty of
swindling when they place upon their placards FOR SALE: A FINE VILLA,
WELL BUILT, even when it is neither good nor properly built, still
less guilty are they who say nothing in praise of their house. For
there the purchaser may exercise his own judgment, what fraud can
there be on the part of the vendor? But if, again, not all that is
expressly stated has to be made good, do you think a man is bound to
make good what has not been said? What, pray, would be more stupid
than for a vendor to recount all the faults in the article he is
offering for sale? And what would be so absurd as for an auctioneer to
cry, at the owner's bidding, 'Here is an unsanitary house for sale'?"

## 56

In this way, then, in certain doubtful cases moral rectitude is
defended on the one side, while on the other side the case of
expediency is so presented as to make it appear not only morally right
to do what seems expedient, but even morally wrong not to do it. This
is the contradiction that seems often to arise between the expedient
and the morally right. But I must give my decision in these two cases;
for I did not propound them merely to raise the ques-

## 57

tions, but to offer a solution. I think, then, that it was the duty
of that grain-dealer not to keep back the facts from the Rhodians, and
of this vendor of the house to deal in the same way with his
purchaser. The fact is that merely holding one's peace about a thing
does not constitute concealment, but concealment consists in trying
for your own profit to keep others from finding out something that you
know, when it is for their interest to know it. And who fails to
discern what manner of concealment that is and what sort of person
would be guilty of it? At all events he would be no candid or sincere
or straightforward or upright or honest man, but rather one who is
shifty, sly, artful, shrewd, underhand, cunning, one grown old in
fraud and subtlety. Is it not inexpedient to subject oneself to all
these terms of reproach and many more besides?

## 58

XIV. If, then, they are to be blamed who suppress the truth, what
are we to think of those who actually state what is false? Gaius
Canius, a Roman knight, a man of considerable wit and literary
culture, once went to Syracuse for a vacation, as he himself used to
say, and not for business. He gave out that he had a mind to purchase
a little country seat, where he could invite his friends and enjoy
himself, uninterrupted by troublesome visitors. When this fact was
spread abroad, one Pythius, a banker of Syracuse, informed him that he
had such an estate; that it was not for sale, however, but Canius
might make himself at home there, if he pleased; and at the same time
he invited him to the estate to dinner next day. Canius accepted. Then
Pythius, who, as might be expected of a moneylender, could command
favours of all classes, called the fishermen together and asked them
to do their fishing the next day out in front of his villa, and told
them what he wished them to do. Canius came to dinner at fleet of
boats before their eyes; each fisherman brought in in turn the catch
that he had made; and the fishes were deposited at the feet of
Pythius.

## 59

"Pray, Pythius," said Canius thereupon, "what does this mean? - all
these fish? - all these boats?"  "No wonder," answered Pythius; "this
is where all the fish in Syracuse are; here is where the fresh water
comes from; the fishermen cannot get along without this estate."
Inflamed with desire for it, Canius insisted upon Pythius's selling it
to him. At first he demurred. To make a long story short, Canius
gained his point. The man was rich, and, in his desire to own the
country seat, he paid for it all that Pythius asked; and he bought the
entire equipment, too. Pythius entered the amount upon his ledger and
completed the transfer. The next day Canius invited his friends; he
came early himself. Not so much as a thole-pin was in sight. He asked
his next-door neighbour whether it was a fishermen's holiday, for not
a sign of them did he see.  "Not so far as I know," said he; "but none
are in the habit of fishing here. And so I could not make out what was
the matter yesterday."

## 60

Canius was furious; but what could he do? For not yet had my
colleague and friend, Gaius Aquilius, introduced the establshed form
to apply to criminal fraud. When asked what he meant by "criminal
fraud," as specified in these forms, he could reply: "Pretending one
thing and practising another" - a very felicitous definition, as one
might expect from an expert in making them. Pythius, therefore, and
all others who do one thing while they pretend another are faithless,
dishonest, and unprincipled scoundrels. {Shylock+} No act of theirs
can be expedient, when what they do is tainted with so many vices.

## 61

XV. But if Aquilius's definition is correct, pretence and
concealment should be done away with in all departments of our daily
life. {PlainDealer+} Then an honest man will not be guilty of either
pretence or concealment in order to buy or to sell to better
advantage. Besides, your "criminal fraud" had previously been
prohibited by the statutes: the penalty in the matter of trusteeships,
for example, is fixed by the Twelve Tables; for the defrauding of
minors, by the Praetorian law. The same prohibition is effective,
without statutory enactment, in equity cases, in which it is added
that the decision shall be "as good_faith+ requires."/a In all other
cases in equity, moreover, the following phrases are most noteworthy:
in a case calling for arbitration in the matter of a wife's dowry:
what is "the fairer is the better"; in a suit for the restoration of a
trust: "honest dealing, as between honest parties." Pray, then, can
there be any element of fraud in what is adjusted for the "better and
fairer"? Or can anything fraudulent or unprincipled be done, when
"honest dealing between honest parties" is stipulated? But "criminal
fraud," as Aquilius says, consists in false pretence. We must,
therefore, keep misrepresentation entirely out of business
transactions: the seller will not engage a bogus bidder to run prices
up nor the buyer one to bid low against himself to keep them down; and
each, if they come to naming a price, will state once for all what he
will give or take. Why, when Quintus Scaevola, the son of Publius
Scaevola, asked that the price of a farm that he desired to purchase
be definitely named and the vendor named it, he replied that he
considered it worth more, and paid him 100,000 sesterces over and
above what he asked. No one could say that this was not the act of an
honest man; but people do say that it was not the act of a
worldly-wise man, any more than if he had sold for a smaller amount
than he could have commanded. Here, then, is that mischievous idea -
the world accounting some men upright, others wise; and it is this
fact that gives Ennius occasion to say:

> In vain is the wise man wise, who cannot benefit himself.

And Ennius is quite right, if only he and I were agreed upon the meaning of "benefit." 

## 63

Now I observe that Hecaton of Rhodes, a pupil of Panaetius, says in
his books on "Moral Duty" dedicated to Quintus Tubero that "it is a
wise man's duty to take care of his private interests, at the same
time doing nothing contrary to the civil customs, laws, and
institutions. But that depends on our purpose in seeking prosperity;
for we do not aim to be rich for ourselves alone but for our children,
relatives, friends, and, above all, for our country. For the private
fortunes of individuals are the wealth of the state." Hecaton could
not for a moment approve of Scaevola's act, which I cited a moment
ago; for he openly avows that he will abstain from doing for his own
profit only what the law expressly forbids. Such a man de not enter;,
or, if he only is a good man who helps all he can, and harms no one,
it will certainly be no easy matter for us to find the good man as
thus defined. To conclude, then, it is never expedient to do wrong,
because wrong is always immoral; and it is always expedient to be
good, because goodness is always moral. XVI. In the laws pertaining to
the sale of real property it is stipulated in our civil code that when
a transfer of any real estate is made, all its defects shall be
declared as far as they are known to the vendor. According to the laws
of the Twelve Tables it used to be sufficient that such faults as had
been expressly declared should be made good and that for any flaws
which the vendor expressly denied, when questioned, he should be
assessed double damages. A like penalty for failure to make such
declaration also has now been secured by our jurisconsults: they have
decided that any defect in a piece of real estate, if known to the
vendor but not expressly

## 66

stated, must be made good by him. For example, the augurs were
proposing to take observations from the citadel and they ordered
Tiberius Claudius Centumalus, who owned a house upon the Caelian Hill,
to pull down such parts of the building as obstructed the augurs' view
by reason of their height. Claudius at once advertised his block for
sale, and Publius Calpurnius Lanarius bought it. The same notice was
served also upon him. And so, when Calpurnius had pulled down those
parts of the building and discovered that Claudius had advertised it
for sale only after the augurs had ordered them to be pulled down, he
summoned the former owner before a court of equity to decide "what
indemnity the owner was under obligation 'in good faith' to pay and
deliver to him." The verdict was pronounced by Marcus Cato, the father
of our Cato (for as other men receive a distinguishing name from their
fathers, so he who bestowed upon the world so bright a luminary must
have his distinguishing name from his son); he, as I was saying, was
presiding judge and pronounced the verdict that "since the augurs'
mandate was known to the vendor at the time of making the transfer and
since he had not made it known, he was bound to make good the
purchaser's loss."

## 67

With this verdict he established the principle that it was
essential to good faith that any defect known to the vendor must be
made known to the purchaser. If his decision was right, our
grain-dealer and the vendor of the unsanitary house did not do right
to suppress the facts in those cases. But the civil code cannot be
made to include all cases where facts are thus suppressed; but those
cases which it does include are summarily dealt with. Marcus Marius
Gratidianus, a kinsman of ours, sold back to Gaius Sergius Orata the
house which he himself had bought a few years before from that same
Orata. It was subject to an encumbrance, but Marius had said nothing
about this fact in stating the terms of sale. The case was carried to
the courts. Crassus was counsel for Orata; Antonius was retained by
Gratidianus. Crassus pleaded the letter of the law that "the vendor
was bound to make good the defect, for he had not declared it,
although he was aware of it "; Antonius laid stress upon the equity of
the case, leading that, "inasmuch as the defect in question had not
been unknown to Sergius (for it was the same house that he had sold to
Marius), no declaration of it was needed, and in purchasing it back he
had not been imposed upon, for he knew to what legal liability his
purchase was subject.

## 68

What is the purpose of these illustrations? To let you see that our
forefathers did not countenance sharp practice. XVII. Now the law
disposes of sharp practices in one way, philosophers in another: the
law deals with them as far as it can lay its strong arm upon them;
philosophers, as far as they can be apprehended by reason and
conscience. Now reason demands that nothing be done with unfairness,
with false pretence, or with misrepresentation. Is it not deception,
then, to set snares, 'even if one does not mean to start the game or
to drive it into them? Why, wild creatures often fall into snares
undriven and unpursued. Could one in the same way advertise a house
for sale, post up a notice "To be-sold," like a snare, and have
somebody run into it unsuspecting?

## 69

Owing to the low ebb of public sentiment, such a method of procedure,
I find, is neither by custom accounted morally wrong nor forbidden
either by statute or by civil law; nevertheless it is forbidden by the
moral law. For there is a bond of fellowship although I have often
made this statement, I must still repeat it again and again - which
has the very widest application, uniting all men together and each to
each. This bond of union is closer between those who belong to the
same nation, and more intimate still between those who are citizens of
the same city- state. It is for this reason that our forefathers chose
to understand one thing by the universal law and another by the civil
law. The civil law is not necessarily also the universal law; but the
universal law ought to be also the civil law. But we possess no
substantial, life-like image of true Law and genuine Justice; a mere
outline sketch is all that we enjoy. I only wish that we were true
even to this; for, even as it is, it is drawn from the excellent
models which Nature and Truth afford.

## 70

For how weighty are the words: "That I be not deceived and
defrauded through you and my confidence in you"! How precious are
these "As between honest people there ought to be honest dealing, and
no deception "! But who are "honest people," and what is "honest
dealing" - these are serious questions. It was Quintus Scaevola, the
pontifex maximus, who used to attach the greatest importance to all
questions of arbitration to which the formula was appended " as good
faith requires "; and he held that the expression "good faith" had a
very extensive application, for it was employed in trusteeships and
partnerships, in trusts and commissions, in buying and selling, in
hiring and letting - in a word, in all the transactions on which the
social relations of daily life depend; in these he said, it required a
judge of great ability to decide the extent of each individual's
obligation to the other, especially when the counter-claims were
admissible in most cases.

## 71

Away, then, with sharp practice and trickery, which desires, of
course, to pass for wisdom, but is far from it and totally unlike
it. For the function of wisdom is to discriminate between good and
evil; whereas, inasmuch as all things morally wrong are evil, trickery
prefers the evil to the good.  It is not only in the case of real
estate transfers that the civil law, based upon a natural feeling for
the right, punishes trickery and deception, but also in the sale of
slaves every form of deception on the vendor's part is disallowed. For
by the aediles' ruling the vendor is answerable for any deficiency in
the slave he sells, for he is supposed to know if his slave is sound,
or if he is a runaway, or a thief. The case of those who have just
come into the possession of slaves by inheritance is different.

## 72

From this we come to realize that since Nature is the source of
right, it is not in accord with Nature that anyone should take
advantage of his neighbour's ignorance. And no greater curse in life
can be found than knavery that wears the mask of wisdom. Thence come
those countless cases in which the expedient seems to conflict with
the right. For how few will be found who can refrain from wrong-doing,
if assured of the power to keep it an absolute secret and to run no
risk of punishment!

## 73

XVIII. Let us put our principle to the test, if you please, and see
if it holds good in those instances in which, perhaps, the world in
general finds no wrong; for in this connection we do not need to
discuss cut- throats, poisoners, forgers of wills, thieves, and
embezzlers of public moneys, who should be repressed not by lectures
and discussions of philosophers, but by chains and prison walls; but
let us study here the conduct of those who have the reputation of
being honest men. Certain individuals brought from Greece to Rome a
forged will, purporting to be that of the wealthy Lucius Minucius
Basilus. The more easily to procure validity for it, they made
joint-heirs with themselves two of the most influential men of the
day, Marcus Crassus and Quintus Hortensius. Although these men
suspected that the will was a forgery, still, as they were conscious
of no personal guilt in the matter, they did not spurn the miserable
boon procured through the crime of others. What shall we say, then? Is
this excuse competent to acquit them of guilt? I cannot think so,
although I loved the one while he lived, and do not hate the other now

## 74

that he is dead. Be that as it may, Basilus had in fact desired
that his nephew Marcus Satrius should bear his name and inherit his
property, (I refer to the Satrius who is the present patron of Picenum
and the Sabine country - and oh, what a shameful stigma it is upon the
times!/a) And therefore it was not right that two of the leading
citizens of Rome should take the estate and Satrius succeed to nothing
except his uncle's name. For if he does wrong who does not ward off
and repel injury when he can - as I explained in the course of the
First Book - what is to be thought of the man who not only does not
try to prevent wrong, but actually aids and abets it? For my part, I
do not believe that even genuine legacies are moral, if they are
sought after by designing flatteries and by attentions hypocritical
rather than sincere. And yet in such cases there are times when one
course is likely to appear expedient and another 75 morally right. The
appearance is deceptive; for our standard is the same for expediency
and for

## 75

moral rectitude. And the man who does not accept the truth of this
will be capable of any sort of dishonesty, any sort of crime. For if
he reasons, "That is, to be sure, the right course, but this course
brings advantage," he will not hesitate in his mistaken judgment to
divorce two conceptions that Nature has made one; and that spirit
opens the door to all sorts of dishonesty, wrong-doing, and
crime. XIX. Suppose, then, that a good man had such power that at a
snap of his fingers his name could steal into rich men's wills, he
would not avail himself of that power - no, not even though he could
be perfectly sure that no one would ever suspect it. Suppose, on the
other hand, that one were to offer a Marcus Crassus the power, by the
mere snapping, of his fingers, to get himself named as heir, when he
was not really an heir, he would, I warrant you, dance in the
forum. But the righteous man, the one whom we feel to be a good man,
would never rob anyone of anything to enrich himself. If anybody is
astonished at this doctrine, let him confess

## 76

that he does not know what a good man is. If, on the ether hand,
anyone should desire to unfold the idea of a good man which lies
wrapped up in his own mind,/a he would then at once make it clear to
himself that a good man is one who helps all whom he can and harms
nobody, unless provoked by wrong. What shall we say, then? Would he
not be doing harm who by a kind of magic spell should succeed in
displacing the real heirs to an estate and pushing himself into their
place? "Well," someone may say, "is he not to do what is expedient,
what is advantageous to himself?" Nay, verily; he should rather be
brought to realize that nothing that is unjust is either advantageous
or expedient; if he does not learn this lesson, it will never be
possible for him to be a "good man."

## 77

When I was a boy, I used to hear my father tell that Gaius Fimbria,
an ex-consul, was judge in a case of Marcus Lutatius Pinthia, a Roman
knight of irreproachable character. On that occasion Pinthia had laid
a wager to be forfeited "if he did not prove in court that he was a
good man." Fimbria declared that he would never render a decision in
such a case, for fear that he might either rob a reputable man of his
good name, if he decided against him, or be thought to have pronounced
someone a good man, when such a character is, as he said, established
by the performance of countless duties and the possession of
praiseworthy qualities without number. To this type of good man, then,
known not only to a Socrates but even to a Fimbria, nothing can
possibly seem expedient that is not morally right. Such a man,
therefore, will never venture to think - to say nothing of doing -
anything that he would not dare openly to proclaim. Is it not a shame
that philosophers should be in doubt about moral questions on which
even peasants have no doubts at all? For it is with peasants that the
proverb, already trite with age, originated: when they praise a man's
honour and honesty, they say, "he is a man with whom you can safely
play at odd and even/a in the dark." {Gyges+} What is the point of the
proverb but this -that what is not proper brings no advantage, even if
you can gain your end without anyone's being able to convict you of
wrong?

### Footnote

a Lit. flash with the fingers; shoot out some fingers, the
number of which had to be guessed.

## 78

Do you not see that in the light of this proverb no excuse is
availilble either for the Gyges+ of the story or for the man who I
assumed a moment ago could with a snap of his fingers sweep together
everybody's inheritance at once? For as the morally wrong cannot by
any possibility be made morally right, however successfully it may be
covered up, so what is not morally right cannot be made expedient, for
Nature refuses and resists.

## 79

XX. "But stay," someone will object, "when the prize is very great,
there is excuse for doing wrong." Gaius Marius had been left in
obscurity for more than six whole years after his praetorship and had
scarcely the remotest hope of gaining the consulship. It looked as if
he would never even be a candidate for that office. He was now a
lieutenant under Quintus Metellus, who sent him on a furlough to
Rome. There before the Roman People he accused his own general, an
eminent man and one of our first citizens, of purposely protracting
the war and declared that if they would make him consul, he would
within a short time deliver Jugurtha alive or dead into the hands of
the Roman People. And so he was elected consul, it is true, but he was
a traitor to his own good faith and to justice; for by a false charge
he subjected to popular disfavour an exemplary and highly respected
citizen, and that too, although he was his lieutenant and under leave
of absence from him.

## 80

Even our kinsman Gratidianus failed on one occasion to perform what
would be a good man's duty: in his praetorship the tribunes of the
people summoned the college of praetors to council, in order to adopt
by joint resolution a standard of value for our currency; for at that
time the value of money was so fluctuating that no one could tell how
much he was worth. In joint session they drafted an ordinance,
defining the penalty and the method of procedure in cases of violation
of the ordinance, and agreed that they should all appear together upon
the rostra in the afternoon to publish it. And while all the rest
withdrew, some in one direction, some in another, Marius (Gratidianus)
went straight from the council-chamber to the rostra and published
individually what had been drawn up by all together. And that coup, if
you care to know, brought him vast honour; in every street statues of
him were erected; before these incense and candles burned. In a word,
no one ever enjoyed greater popularity with the masses.

## 81

It is such cases as these that sometimes perplex us in our
consideration, when the point in which justice is violated does not
seem so very significant, but the consequences of such slight
transgression seem exceedingly important. For example, it was not so
very wrong morally, in the eyes of Marius,/a to over-reach his
colleagues and the tribunes in turning to himself alone all the credit
with the people; but to secure by that means his election to the
consulship, which was then the goal of his ambition,/b seemed very
greatly to his interest. But for all cases we have one rule, with
which I desire you to be perfectly familiar: that which seems
expedient must not be morally wrong; or, if it is morally wrong, it
must not seem expedient. What follows? Can we account either the great
Marius or our Marius Gratidianus a good man? Work out your own ideas
and sift your thoughts so as to see what conception and idea of a good
man they contain. Pray, tell me, does it coincide with the character
of your good man to lie for his own proflt, to slander, to overreach,
to deceive? Nay, verily; anything but that!

## 82

Is there, then, any object of such value or any advantage so worth
the winning that, to gain it, one should sacrifice the name of a "good
man" and the lustre of his reputation? What is there that your
so-called expediency can bring to you that will compensate for what it
can take away, if it steals from you the name of a "good man" and
causes you to lose your sense of honour and justice? For what
difference does it make whether a man is actually transformed into a
beast or whether, keeping the outward appearance of a man, he has the
savage nature of a beast within? XXI. Again, when people disregard
everything that is morally right and true, if only they may secure
power thereby, are they not pursuing the same course as he a who
wished to have as a father-in-law the man by whose effrontery he might
gain power for himself? He thought it advantageous to secure supreme
power while the odium of it fell upon another; and he failed to see
how unjust to his country this was, and how wrong morally. But the
father-in-law himself used to have continually upon his lips the Greek
verses from the Phoenissae, which I will reproduce as well as I can
-awkwardly, it may be, but still so that the meaning can be
understood:

> If wrong may e'er be right, for a throne's sake

> Were wrong most right:-be God in all else feared!/a

Our tyrant deserved his death for having made an exception of the one
thing that was the blackest

## 83

crime of all. Why do we gather instances of petty crime - legacies
criminally obtained and fraudulent buying and selling? Behold, here
you have a man who was ambitious to be king of the Roman People and
master of the whole world; and he achieved it! The man who maintains
that such an ambition is morally right is a madman; for he justifies
the destruction of law and liberty and thinks their hideous and
detestable suppression glorious. But if anyone agrees that it is not
morally right to be kind in a state that once was free and that ought
to be free now, and yet imagines that it is advantageous for him who
can reach that position, with what remonstrance or rather with what
appeal should I try to tear him away from so strange a delusion? For,
oh ye immortal gods! can the most horrible and hideous of all murders
- that of fatherland -bring advantage to anybody, even though he who
has committed such a crime receives from his enslaved fellow-citizens
the title of "Father of his Country"?/b Expediency, therefore, must be
measured by the standard of moral rectitude, and in such a way, too,
that these two words shall seem in sound only to be different but in
real meaning to be one and the same.

## 84

What greater advantage one could have, according to the standard of
popular opinion, than to be a king, I do not know; when, however, I
begin to bring the question back to the standard of truth, then I find
nothing more disadvantageous for one who has risen to that height by
injustice. For can occasions for worry anxiety, fear by day and by
night, and a life all beset with plots and perils be of advantage to
anybody?

> Thrones have many foes and friends untrue, but few devoted friends,

says Accius. But of what sort of throne was he speaking? Why, one that
was held by right, handed down from Tantalus and Pelops. Aye, but how
many more foes, think you, had that king who with the Roman People's
army brought the Roman People themselves into subjection and compelled
a state that not only had been free but had been mistress of the

## 85

world to be his slave? What stains do you think he had upon his
conscience, what scars upon his heart? But whose life can be
advantageous to himself, if that life is his on the condition that the
man who takes it shall be held in undying gratitude and glory? But if
these things which seem so very advantageous are not advantageous
because they are full of shame and moral wrong, we ought to be quite
convinced that nothing can be expedient that is not morally right.

## 86

XXII. And yet this very question has been decided on many occasions
before and since; but in the war with Pyrrhus the decision rendered by
Gaius Fabricius, in his second consulship, and by our senate was
particularly striking. Without provocation King Pyrrhus had declared
war upon the Roman People; the struggle was against a generous and
poweful prince, and the supremacy of power was the prize; a deserter
came over from him to the camp of Fabricius and promised, if Fabricius
would assure him of a reward, to return to the camp of Pyrrhus as
secretly as he had come, administer poison to the king, and bring
about his death. Fabricius saw to it that this fellow was taken back
to Pyrrhus; and his action was commended by the senate. And yet, if
the mere show of expediency and the popular conception of it are all
we want, this one deserter would have put an end to that wasting war
and to a formidable foe of our supremacy; but it would have been a
lasting shame and disgrace to us to have overcome not by valour but by
crime the man with whom we had a contest for glory.

## 87

Which course, then, was more expedient for Fabricius, who was to
our city what Aristides was to Athens, or for our senate, who never
divorced expediency from honour - to contend against the enemy with
the sword or with poison? If supremacy is to be sought for the sake of
glory, crime should be excluded, for there can be no glory in crime;
but if it is power for its own sake that is sought, whatever the
price, it cannot be expedient if it is linked with shame. That
well-known measure, therefore, introduced by Philippus, the son of
Quintus, was not expedient. With the authority of the senate, Lucius
Sulla had exempted from taxation certain states upon receipt of a lump
sum of money from them. Philippus proposed that they should again be
reduced to the condition of tributary states, without repayment on our
part of the money that they had paid for their exemption. And the
senate accepted his proposal. Shame upon our government! The pirates'
sense of

## 88

can be expedient? Furthermore, can hatred and shame be expedient
for any government? For government ought to be founded upon fair fame
and the loyalty of allies. On this point I often disagreed even with
my friend Cato; it seemed to me that he was too rigorous in his
watchful care over the claims of the treasury and the revenues; he
refused everything that the farmers of the revenue asked for and much
that the allies desired; whereas, as I insisted, it was our duty to be
generous to the allies and to treat the publicans as we were
accustomed individually to treat our tenants - and all the more,
because harmony between the orders was essential to the welfare if the
republic./a Curio, too, was wrong, when he pleaded that the demands of
the people beyond the Po were just, but never failed to add, "Let
expediency prevail." He ought rather to have proved that the claims
were not just, because they were not expedient for the republic, than
to have admitted that they were just, when, as he maintained, they
were not expedient.

## 89

XXIII. The sixth book of Hecaton's "Moral Duties" is full of
questions like the following: "Is it consistent with a good man's duty
to let his slaves go hungry when provisions are at famine price?"
Hecaton gives the argument on both sides of the question; but still in
the end it is by the standard of expediency, as he conceives it,
rather than by one of human feeling, that he decides the question of
duty.  Then he raises this question: supposing a man had to throw part
of his cargo overboard in a storm, should he prefer to sacrifice a
high-priced horse or a cheap and worthless slave? In this case regard
for his property interest inclines him one way, human feeling the
other.  "Suppose that a foolish man has seized hold of a plank from a
sinking ship, shall a wise man wrest it away from him if he can?"
"No," says Hecaton; "for that would be unjust." "But how about the
owner of the ship? Shall he take the plank away because it belongs to
him?"  "Not at all; no more than he would be willing when far out at
sea to throw a passenger overboard on the ground that the ship was
his. For until they reach the place for which the ship is chartered,
she belongs to the passengers, not to the owner."

## 90

"Again; suppose there were two to be saved from the sinking ship -
both of them wise men - and only one small plank, should both seize it
to save themselves? Or should one give give place to the other?"
"Why, of course, one should give place to the other, but that other
must be the one whose life is more valuable either for his own sake or
for that of his country."  "But what if these considerations are of
equal weight in both?"  "Then there will be no contest, but one will
give place to the other, as if the point were decided by lot or at a
game of odd and even."  "Again, suppose a father were robbing temples
or making underground passages to the treasury, should a son inform
the officers of it?"  "Nay; that were a crime; rather should he defend
his father, in case he were indicted."  "Aye, verily; but it is to our
country's interest to have citizens who are loyal to their parents."
"But once more - if the father attempts to make himself king, or to
betray his country, shall the son hold his peace?" "Nay, verily; he
will plead with his father not to do so. If that accomplishes nothing,
he will take him to task; he will even threaten; and in the end, if
things point to the destruction of the state, he will sacrifice his
father to the safety of his country."

## 91

Again he raises the question: "If a wise man should inadvertently
accept counterfeit money for good, will he offer it as genuine in
payment of a debt after he discovers his mistake?" Diogenes says,
"Yes," Antipater, "No," and I agree with him. If a man knowingly
offers for sale wine that is spoiling, ought he to tell his customers?
Diogenes thinks that it is not required; Antipater holds that an
honest man would do so. These are like so many points of the law
disputed among the Stoics. "In selling a slave, should his faults be
declared - not those only which he seller is bound by the civil law to
declare or have the slave returned to him, but also the fact that he
is untruthful, or disposed to ramble. or steal, or get drunk?" The one
thinks such faults should be declared, the other does not.

## 92

"If a man thinks that he is selling brass, when he is actually
selling gold. should an upright man inform him that his stuff is gold,
or go on buying for one shilling/a what is worth a thousand?" It is
clear enough by this time what my views are on these questions, and
what are the grounds of dispute between the above-named philosophers.
XXIV. The question arises also whether agreements and promises must
always be kept, "when," in the language of the praetors' edicts, "they
have not been secured through force or criminal fraud." If one man
gives another a remedy for the dropsy. with the stipulation that, if
he is cured by it, he shall never make use of it again; suppose the
patient's health is restored by the use of it, but some years later he
contracts the same disease once more; and suppose he cannot secure
from the man with whom he made the agreement permission to use the
remedy again, what should he do? That is the question. Since the man
is unfeeling in refusing the request, and since no harm could be done
to him by his friend's using the remedy, the sick man is justified in
doing what he can for his own life and health.

## 93

Again: suppose that a millionaire is making some wise man his heir
and leaving him in his will a hundred million sesterces;/a and suppose
that he has asked the wise man, before he enters upon his inheritance,
to dance publicly in broad daylight in the forum; and suppose that the
wise man has given his promise to do so, because the rich man would
not leave him his fortune on any other condition; should he keep his
promise or not? I wish he had made no such promise; that, I think,
would have been in keeping with his dignity. But, seeing that he has
made it, it will be morally better for him, if he believes it morally
wrong to dance in the forum, to break his promise and refuse to accept
his inheritance rather than to keep his promise and accept it -
unless, perhaps, he contributes the money to the state to meet some
grave crisis. In that case, to promote thereby the interests of one's
country, it would not be morally wrong even to dance, if you please,
in the forum.

## 94

XXV. No more binding are those promises which are inexpedient for
the persons themselves to whom they have been given. To go back to the
realm of story, the sun-god promised his son Phaethon to do for him
whatever he should wish. His wish was to be allowed to ride in his
father's chariot. It was granted. And before he came back to the
ground he was consumed by a stroke of lightning. How much better had
it been, if in this the the father's promise had not been kept. And
what of that promise, the fulfilment of which Theseus required from
Neptune? When Neptune offered him three wishes, he wished for the
death of his son Hippolytus, because the father was suspicious of the
son's relations with his step-mother. And when this wish was granted,
Theseus was overwhelmed with grief. And once more; when Agamemnon had
vowed to Diana the most beautiful creature born that year within his
realm, he was brought to sacrifice Iphigenia; for in that year nothing
was born more beautiful than she. He ought to have broken his vow
rather than commit so horrible a crime.  Promises+ are, therefore,
sometimes not to be kept; and trusts are not always to be
restored. Suppose that a person leaves his sword with you when he is
in his right mind, and demands it back in a fit of insanity; it would
be criminal to restore it to him; it would be your duty not to do
so. Again, suppose that a man who has entrusted money to you proposes
to make war upon your common country, should you restore the trust? I
believe you should not; for you would be acting against the state,
which ought to be the dearest thing in the world to you. Thus there
are many things which in and of themselves seem morally right, but
which under certain circumstances prove to be not morally right: to
keep a promise, to abide by an agreement, to restore a trust may, with
a change of expediency, cease to be morally right. With this I think I
have said enough about those actions which masquerade as expedient
under the guise of prudence, while they are really contrary to
justice.

## 96

Since, however, in Book One we derived moral duties from the four
sources of moral rectitude, let us continue the same fourfold division
here in pointing out how hostile to virtue are those courses of
conduct which seem to be, but really are not, expedient. We have
discussed wisdom, which cunning seeks to counterfeit, and likewise
justice, which is always expedient. There remain for our discussion
two divisions of moral rectitude, the one of which is discernible in
the greatness and pre-eminence of a superior soul, the other, in the
shaping and regulation of it by temperance and self-control.

## 97

XXVI. Ulysses thought his ruse expedient, as the tragic poets, at
least, have represented him. In Homer, our most reliable authority, no
such suspicion is cast upon him; but the tragedies charge him with
trying to escape a soldier's service by feigning madness. The trick
was not morally right, but, someone may perhaps say, "It was expedient
for him to keep his throne and live at ease in Ithaca with parents,
wife, and son. Do you think that there is any glory in facing daily
toil and danger that can be compared with a life of such
tranquillity?"  Nay; I think that tranquillity at such a price is to
be despised and rejected; for if it is not morally

## 98

right, neither is it expedient. For what do you think would have
been said of Ulysses, if he had persisted in that pretended madness,
seeing that, notwithstanding his deeds of heroism in the war, he was
nevertheless upbraided by Ajax thus:

'Twas he himself who first proposed the oath; ye all Do know; yet he
alone of all his vow did break; He feigned persistently that he was
mad, that thus He might not have to join the host. And had not then
Palamedes, shrewd and wise, his tricky impudence Unmasked, he had
evaded e'en for aye his vow.

## 99

Nay, for him it had been better to battle not only with the enemy
but also with the waves, as he did, than to desert Greece when she was
united for waging the war against the barbarians. But let us leave
illustrations both from story and from foreign lands and turn to real
events in our own history. Marcus Atilius Regulus in his second
consulship was taken prisoner in Africa by the stratagem of
Xanthippus, a Spartan general serving under the command of Hannibal's
father Hamilcar./a He was sent to the senate on parole, sworn to
return to Carthage himself, if certain noble prisoners of war/b were
not restored to the Carthaginians. When he came to Rome, he could not
fail to see the specious appearance of expediency, but he decided that
it was unreal, as the outcome proves. His apparent interest was to
remain in his own country, to stay at home with his wife and children,
and to retain his rank and dignity as an ex-consul, regarding the
defeat which he had suffered as a misfortune that might come to anyone
in the game of war. Who says that this was not expedient? Who, think
you? Greatness of soul and courage say that it was

## 100

not. XXVII. Can you ask for more competent authorities? The denial
comes from those virtues, for it is characteristic of them to await
nothing with fear, to rise superior to all the vicissitudes of earthly
life, and to count nothing intolerable that can befall a human
being. What, then, did he do? He came into the senate and stated his
mission; but he refused to give his own vote on the question; for, he
held, he was not a member of the senate so long as he was bound by the
oath sworn to his enemies. And more than that, he said - "What a
foolish fellow," someone will say, "to oppose his own best interests"
he said that it was not expedient that the prisoners should be
returned; for they were young men and gallant officers, while he was
already bowed with age. And when his counsel prevailed, the prisoners
were retained and he himself returned to Carthage; affection for his
country and his family failed to hold him back. And even then he was
not ignorant of the fact that he was going to a most cruel enemy and
to exquisite toraged prisoner of war, a man of consular rank forsworn.

## 101

"But," you will say, "it was foolish of him not only not to
advocate the exchange of prisoners but even to plead against such
action!"  How was it foolish? Was it so, even if his policy was for
the good of the state? Nay; can what is inexpedient for the state be
expedient for any individual citizen?  XXVIII. People overturn the
fundamental principles established by Nature, when they divorce
expediency from moral rectitude. For we all seek to obtain what is to
us expedient; we are irresistibly drawn toward it, and we cannot
possibly be otherwise. For who is there that would turn his back upon
what is to him expedient? Or rather, who is there that does not exert
himself to the utmost to secure it? But because we cannot discover it
anywhere except in good report, propriety, and moral rectitude, we
look upon these three for that reason as the first and the highest
objects of endeavour, while what we term expediency we account not so
much an ornament to our dignity as a necessary incident to living.

## 102

"What significance, then," someone will say, "do we attach to an
oath? It is not that we fear the wrath of Jove, is it? Not at all; it
is the universally accepted view of all philosophers that God is never
angry, never hurtful. This is the doctrine not only of those/a who
teach that God is Himsel free from troubling cares and that He imposes
no trouble upon others, but also of those/b who believe that God is
ever working and ever directing His world. Furthermore, suppose
Jupiter had been wroth, what greater injury could He have inflicted
upon Regulus than Regulus brought upon himself? Religious scruple,
therefore, had no such preponderance as to outweigh so great
expediency." "Or was he afraid that his act would be morally wrong? As
to that, first of all, the proverb says, 'Of evils choose the least.'
Did that moral wrong then, really involve as great an evil as did that
awful torture? And secondly, there are the lines of Accius:

> Thyestes. Hast thou broke thy faith? 

> Atreus. None have I given; none give I ever to the faithless.

Although this sentiment is put into the mouth of a wicked king, still
it is illuminating in its correctness."

## 103

Their third argument is this: just as we maintain that some things
seem expedient but are not, so they maintain, some things seem morally
right but are not. "For example," they contend, "in this very case it
seems morally right for Regulus to have returned to torture for the
sake of being true to his oath. But it proves not to be morally right,
because what an enemy extorted by force ought not to have been
binding." As their concluding argument, they add: whatever is highly
expedient may prove to be morally right, even if it did not seem so in
advance. These are in substance the arguments raised against the
conduct of Regulus. Let us consider them each in turn.

## 104

XXIX. "He need not have been afraid that Jupiter in anger would
inflict injury upon him; he is not wont to be angry or hurtful."  This
argument, at all events, has no more weight against Regulus's conduct
than it has against the keeping of any other oath. But in taking an
oath it is our duty to consider not what one may have to fear in case
of violation but wherein its obligation lies: an oath is an assurance
backed by religious sanctity; and a solemn promise given, as before
God as one's witness, is to be sacredly kept. For the question no
longer concerns the wrath of the gods (for there is no such thing) but
the obligations of justice and good faith. For, as Ennius says so
admirably:

> Gracious Good Faith, on wings upborne; thou oath in Jupiter's great
name!

Whoever, therefore, violates his oath violates Good Faith; and, as we
find it stated in Cato's speech, our forefathers chose that she should
dwell upon the Capitol "neighbour to Jupiter Supreme and Best."

## 105

"But," objection was further made, "even if Jupiter had been
angry, he could not have inflicted greater injury upon Regulus than
Regulus brought upon himself." Quite true, if there is no evil except
pain. But philosopbers/a of the bighest authority assure us that pain
is not only not the supreme evil but no evil at all. And pray do not
disparage Regulus, as no unimportant witness-nay, I am rather inclined
to think he was the very best witness-to the truth of their
doctrine. For what more co that is, shall one "choose moral wrong
rather than misfortune," or is there any evil greater than moral
wrong? For if physical deformity excites a certain amount of aversion,
how offensive ought the deformity and hideousness of a demoralized
soul to seem!

## 106

Therefore, those/a who discuss these problems with more rigour
make bold to say that moral wrong is the only evil, while those/b who
treat them with more laxity do not hesitate to call it the supreme
evil. Once more, they quote the sentiment:

> "None have I given, none give I ever to the faithless."

It was proper for the poet to say that, because, when he was working
out his Atreus, he had to make the words fit the character. But if
they mean to adopt it as a principle, that a pledge given to the
faithless is no pledge, let them look to it that it be not a mere
loophole for perjury that they seek.

## 107

Furthermore, we have laws regulating warfare, and fidelity to an
oath must often be observed in dealings with an enemy: for an oath
sworn with the clear understanding in one's own mind that it should be
performed must be kept; but if there is no such understanding, it does
not count as perjury if one does not perform the vow. For example,
suppose that one does not deliver the amount agreed upon with pirates
as the price of one's life, that would be accounted no deception - not
even if one should fail to deliver the ransom after having sworn to do
so; for a pirate is not included in the number of lawful enemies, but
is

## 108

word nor any oath mutually binding. For swearing to what is false
is not necessarily perjury, but to take an oath "upon your
conscience," as it is expressed in our legal formulas, and then fail
to performit, that is perjury. For Euripides aptly says: "My tongue
has sworn; the mind I have has sworn no oath." But Regulus had no
right to confound by perjury the terms and covenants of war made with
an enemy. For the war was being carried on with a legitimate, declared
enemy; and to regulate our dealings with such an enemy, we have our
whole fetial/a code as well as many other laws that are binding in
common between nations. Were this not the case, the senate would never
have delivered up illustrious men of ours in chains to the enemy.

## 109

XXX. And yet that very thing happened. Titus Veturius and Spurius
Postumius in their second consulship lost the battle at the Caudine
Forks, and our legions were sent under the yoke. And because they made
peace with the Samnites, those generals were delivered up to them, for
they had made the peace without the approval of the people and
senate. And Tiberius Numicius and Quintus Maelius, tribunes of the
people, were delivered up at the same time, because it was with their
sanction that the peace had been concluded. This was done in order
that the peace with the Samnites might be annulled. And Postumius, the
very man whose delivery was in question, was the proposer and advocate
of the said delivery. Many years later,/b Gaius Mancinus had a similar
experience: he advocated the bill, introduced in accordance with a
decree of the senate by Lucius Furius and Sextus Atilius, that he
should be delivered up to the Numantines, with whom he had made a
treaty without authorization from the senate; and when the bill was
passed, he was delivered up to the enemy. His action was more
honourable than Quintus Pompey's. Pompey's situation was identical
with his, and yet at his own entreaty the bill was rejected. In this
latter case, apparent expediency prevailed over moral rectitude; in
the former cases, the false semblance of expediency was overbalanced
by the weight of moral rectitude.

## 110

"But," they argued against Regulus, "an oath extorted by force
ought not to have been binding." As if force could be brought to bear
upon a brave man! " Why, then, did he make the journey to the senate,
especially when he intended to plead against the surrender of the
prisoners of war?" Therein you are criticizing what is the noblest
feature of his conduct. For he was not content to stand upon his own
Judement but took up the case, in order that the judgment might be
that of the senate; and had it not been for the weight of his
pleading, the prisoners would certainly have been restored to the
Carthaginians; and in that case, Regulus would have remained safe at
home in his country. But because he thought this not expedient for his
country, he believed that it was therefore morally right for him to
declare his conviction and to suffer for it. When they argued also
that what is highly expedient may prove to be morally right, they
ought rather to say not that it "may prove to be" but that it actually
is morally right. For nothing can be expedient which is not at the
same time morally right; neither can a thing be morally right just
because it is expedient, but it is expedient because it is morally
right. From the many splendid examples in history therefore, we could
not easily point to one either more praiseworthy or more heroic than
the conduct of Regulus.

## 111

XXXI. But of all that is thus praiseworthy in the conduct of
Regulus, this one feature above all others calls for our admiration:
it was he who offered the motion that the prisoners of war be
retained. For the fact of his returning may seem admirable to us,
nowadays, but in those times he could not have done otherwise. That
merit, therefore, belongs to the age, not to the man. For our
ancestors were of the opinion that no bond was more effective in
guaranteeing good faith than an oath. That is, clearly proved by the
laws of the Twelve Tables, by the "sacred" laws,/a by the treaties in
which good faith is pledged even to the enemy, by the investigations
made by the censors and the penalties, imposed by them; for there were
no cases in which they used to render more rigorous decisions than in
cases of violation of an oath.

## 112

Marcus Pomponius, a tribune of the people, brought an indictment
against Lucius Manlius, Aulus's son, for having extended the term of
his dictatorship a few days beyond its expiration. He further charged
him with having banished his own son Titus (afterward surnamed
Torquatus) from all companionship with his was then a young man, heard
that his father was in trouble on his account, he hastened to Rome -
so the story goes - and at daybreak presented himself at the house of
Pomponius. The visitor was announced to Pomponius. Inasmuch as he
thought that the son in his anger meant to bring him some new evidence
to use against the father, he arose from his bed, asked all who were
present to leave the room, and sent word to the young man to come
in. Upon entering, he at once drew a sword and swore that he would
kill the tribune on the spot, if he did not swear an oath to withdraw
the suit against his father. Constrained by the terror of the
situation, Pomponius gave his oath. He reported the matter to the
people, explaining why he was obliged to drop the prosecution, and
withdrew his suit against Manlius. Such was the regard for the
sanctity of an oath in those days. And that lad was the Titus Manlius
who in the battle on the Anio killed the Gaul by whom he had been
challenged to single combat, pulled off his torque and thus won his
surname. And in his third consulship he routed the Latins and put them
to flight in the battle on the Veseris. He was one of the greatest of
the great, and one who, while more than generous toward his father,
could yet be bitterly severe toward his son.

## 113

XXXII. Now, as Regulus deserves praise for being true to his oath,
so those ten whom Hannibal sent to the senate on parole after the
battle of Cannae deserve censure, if it is true that they did not
return; for they were sworn to return to the camp which bad fallen
into the hands of the Carthaginians, if they did not succeed in
negotiating an exchange of prisoners. Historians are not in agreement
in regard to the facts. Polybius, one of the very best authorities,
states that of the ten eminent nobles who were sent at that time, nine
returned when their mission failed at the hands of the senate. But one
of the ten, who, a little while after leaving the camp, had gone back
on the pretext that he had forgotten something or other, remained
behind at Rome; he explained that by his return to the camp he was
released from the obligation of his oath. He was wrong; for deceit
does not remove the guilt of perjury - it merely aggravates it. His
cunning that impudently tried to masquerade as prudence was,
therefore, only folly. And so the senate ordered that the cunning
scoundrel should be taken back to Hannibal in chains.

## 114

But the most significant part of the story is this: the eight
thousand prisoners in Hannibal's hands were not men that he had taken
in the battle or that had escaped in the peril of their lives, but men
that the consuls Paulus and Varro had left behind in camp. Though
these might have been ransomed by a small sum of money, the senate
voted not to redeem them, in order that our soldiers might have the
lesson planted in their hearts that they must either conquer or
die. When Hannibal heard this news, according to that same writer, he
lost heart completely, because the senate and the people of Rome
displayed courage so lofty in a time of disaster. Thus apparent
expediency is outweighed when placed in the balance against moral
rectitude.

## 115

Gaius Acilius, on the other hand, the author of a history of Rome
in the camp to release themselves thus from the obligation of their
oath, and that they were branded by the censors with every mark of
disgrace. Let this be the conclusion of this topic. For it must be
perfectly apparent that acts that are done with a cowardly, craven,
abject, broken spirit, as the act of Regulus would have been if he had
supported in regard to the prisoners a measure that seemed to be
advantageous for him personally, but disadvantageous for the state, or
if he had consented to remain at home - that such acts are not
expedient, because they are shameful, dishonourable, and immoral.

## 116

XXXIII. We have still left our fourth division comprising
propriety, moderation, temperance, self-restraint, self-control. Can
anything be expedient, then, which is contrary to such a chorus of
virtues? And yet the Cyrenaics, adherents of the school of Aristippus,
and the philosophers who bear the name of Anniceris find all good to
consist in pleasure and consider virtue praiseworthy only because it
is productive of pleasure. Now that these schools are out of date,
Epicurus has come into vogue - an advocate and supporter of
practically the same doctrine. Against such a philosophy we must fight
it out "with horse and foot," as the saying is, if our purpose is to
defend and maintain our standard of moral rectitude.

## 117

For if, as we find it in the writings of Metrodorus, not only
expediency but happiness in life depends wholly upon a sound physical
constitution {health+} and the reasonable expectation that it will
always remain sound, then that expediency - and, what is more, the
highest expediency, as they estimate it -will assuredly clash with
moral rectitude. For first of all, what position will wisdom occupy in
that system? The position of collector of pleasures from every
possible source? What a sorry state of servitude for a virtue - to be
pandering to sensual pleasure! And what will be the function of
wisdom? To make skilful choice between sensual pleasures? Granted that
there may be nothing more pleasant, what can be conceived more
degrading for wisdom than such a role? Then again, if anyone hold that
pain is the supreme evil, what place in his philosophy has fortitude,
which is but indifference to toil and pain?  For, however many
passages there are in which Epicurus speaks right manfully of pain, we
must nevertheless consider not what he says, but what it is consistent
for a man to say who has defined the good in terms of pleasure and
evil in terms of pain. And further, if I should listen to him, I
should find that in many passages he has a great deal to say about
temperance and self- control; but "the water will not run," as they
say. For how can he commend self-control and yet posit pleasure as the
supreme good? For self-control is the foe of the passions, and the
passions are the handmaids of pleasure.

## 118

And yet when it comes to these three cardinal virtues, those
philosophers shift and turn as best they can, and not without
cleverness. They admit wisdom into their system as the knowledge that
provides pleasures and banishes pain; they clear the way for fortitude
also in some way to fit in with their doctrines, when they teach that
it is a rational means for looking with indifference upon death and
for enduring pain. They bring even temperance in - not very easily, to
be sure, but still as best they can; for they hold that the height of
pleasure is found in the absence of pain. Justice totters or rather, I
should say, lies already prostrate; so also with all those virtues
which are discernible in social life and the fellowship of human
society. For neither goodness nor generosity nor courtesy can exist,
any more than friendship can, if they are not sought of and for
themselves, but are cultivated only for the sake of sensual pleasure
or personal advantage. Let us now recapitulate briefly.

## 119

As I have shown that such expediency as is opposed to moral
rectitude is no expedieney, so I maintain that any and all sensual
pleasure is opposed to moral rectitude. And therefore Calliphon and
Dinomachus, in my judgment, deserve the greater condemnation; they
imagined that they should settle the controversy by coupling pleasure
with moral rectitude; as well yoke a man with a beast! But moral
rectitude does not accept such a union; she abhors it, spurns it. Why,
the supreme good, which ought to be simple, cannot be a compound and
mixture of absolutely contradictory qualities. But this theory I have
discussed more fully in another connection; for the subject is a large
one. Now for the matter before us.

## 120

We have, then, fully discussed the problem how a question is to be
decided, if ever that which seems to be expediency clashes with moral
rectitude. But if, on the other hand, the assertion is made that
pleasure admits of a show of expediency also, there can still be no
possible union between it and moral rectitude. For, to make the most
generous admission we can in favour of pleasure, we will grant that it
may contribute something that possibly gives some spice to life, but
certainly nothing that is really expedient.

## 121

Herewith, my son Marcus, you have a present from your father - a
generous one, in my humble opinion; but its value will depend upon the
spirit in which you receive it. And yet you must welcome these three
books as fellow-guests so to speak, along with your notes on
Cratippus's lectures. But as you would sometimes give ear to me also,
if I had come to Athens (and I should be there now, if my country had
not called me back with accents unmistakable, when I was half-way
there), so you will please devote as much time as you can to these
volumes, for in them my voice will travel to you; and you can devote
to them as much time as you will. And when I see that you take delight
in this branch of philosophy, I shall then talk further with you - at
an early date,/a I hope, face to face - but as long as you are abroad,
I shall converse with you thus at a distance. Farewell, my dear
Cicero, and be assured that, while you are the object of my deepest
affection, you will be dearer to me still, if you find pleasure in
such counsel and instruction.
