OF all the questions that we have discussed, Aebutius Liberalis, none
can seem so essential, or to need, as Sallust puts it, such careful
treatment, as the one that is now before us - whether to bestow a
benefit and to return gratitude for it are in themselves desirable
ends.

Some are to be found who cultivate honourable practices for the
recompense, and care nothing for virtue that is unrewarded; whereas it
has nothing glorious in it if it shows any element of profit. For what
is more shameful than for anyone to calculate the value to a man of
being good, since Virtue neither invites by the prospect of gain, nor
deters by the prospect of loss, and, so far is she from bribing any
man with hopes and promises, that, on the contrary, she bids him spend
upon her, and is more often found in voluntary contributions.  We must
go to her, trampling under foot all self-interest; whithersoever she
calls, whithersoever she sends us we must go, without any regard for
our fortunes, sometimes even without sparing our own blood, and we
must never refuse her demands. "And what shall I gain," you ask, "if I
do this bravely, if I do it gladly?" Only the gain of having done it -
she promises you nothing besides.  If you should chance to encounter
some profit, count it as something additional. The reward of virtuous
acts lies in the acts themselves.  If a virtuous act is in itself a
desirable end, if, further, a benefit is a virtuous act, it follows
that, since they bear the same nature, they cannot be subject to a
different condition.  But that the virtuous course is in itself a
desirable end has been often and abundantly proved.

On this point we Stoics are in arms against the Epicureans, an
effeminate, sheltered set, who philosophize over their cups, and
hold that Virtue is but the handmaid of Pleasures, that she obeys
them, that she is their slave, and sees them enthroned above herself.
"There can be no pleasure," you say, "without virtue." But why does it
come before virtue?  Do you suppose that the question is one of mere
precedence?  The whole principle and power f virtue are thrown into
doubt.  Virtue does not exist if it is possible for her to follow;
hers is the first place, she must lead, must command, must have the
supreme position; you bid her ask for the watchword!  "What
difference," you say, "does it make?  Even I affirm that there can be
no happy life without virtue.  The very pleasure at which I aim, to
which I am enslaved,{freedom+} I disapprove of and condemn if she is
banished.  The only point in question is whether virtue is the cause
of the highest good, or is itself the highest good." Do you suppose
that the answer to this question turns upon merely making a shift in
the order? It does indeed show confusion and obvious blindness to give
preference to last things over first things.  But what I protest
against is, not that virtue is placed second to pleasure, but that
virtue is associated with pleasure at all, for virtue despises
pleasure, is its enemy, and recoils from it as far as it can, being
more acquainted with labour and sorrow, which are manly ills, than
with this womanish good of yours.

It has been needful, my Liberalis, to introduce these considerations
here, because the bestowal of the kind of benefit that is now under
discussion is a mark of virtue, and to bestow it for any reason other
than the mere bestowing of it is a most shameful act. For, if we made
contributions with the expectation of receiving a return, we should
give, not to the most worthy, but to the richest, men; as it is, we
prefer a poor man to an importunate rich man.  That is not a benefit
which has regard for the fortune of the recipient.  Moreover, if it
were only self- interest that moved us to help others, those who could
most easily dispense benefits, such as the rich and powerful and
kings, who need no help from others, would not be under the least
obligation to bestow them; nor, indeed, would the gods bestow the
countless gifts that, day and night, they unceasingly pour forth, for
their own nature is sufficient to them for all their needs, and
renders them fully provided and safe and inviolable; they will,
therefore, give to no man a benefit if their only motive in bestowing
it is a regard for themselves and their own advantage. To take
thought, not where you can best place your benefit, but where you can
derive the most gain, and from whom you can most readily collect, is
to be, not a benefactor, but a money-lender.  And, since the gods are
far removed from such concern, it follows that they will not be
liberal; for, if the only reason for giving a benefit is the advantage
of the giver, and if God can hope for no advantage from us, then no
motive is found for God's giving a benefit.

I know the answer that can be made to this: "Yes, and therefore God
does not give benefits, but, free from all care and unconcerned about
us, he turns his back on the world, and either does something else, or
that which Epicurus counts supreme happiness - does nothing at all,
and benefits no more concern him than injuries." But he who says this
does not hearken to the voices of those who pray and of those who all
around him, lifting their hands to heaven, offer vows for blessings
public and private.  Assuredly this would not be the case, assuredly
all mortals would not have agreed upon this madness of addressing
divinities that were deaf and gods that were ineffectual, unless we
were conscious of their benefits that sometimes are presented unasked,
sometimes are granted in answer to prayer - great and timely gifts,
which by their coming remove grave menaces.  And who is so wretched,
so uncared for, who has been born to so cruel a destiny and punishment
as never to have experienced the great bounty of the gods?  Look at
those who bemoan and deplore their lot - you will find that even these
are not wholly excluded from heavenly benefits, that there is not one
to whom some benefit has not trickled from that most bountiful spring.
And the gift that at birth is dispensed equally to all - is this too
small a thing?  Though the fortunes to which we pass in later life are
dispensed in unequal measure, was it too small a thing that Nature
gave when she gave to us herself?  "God gives no benefits," you say.
Whence, then, comes all that you possess, all that you give, all that
you withhold, all that you hoard, all that you steal?  Whence come the
countless things that delight your eyes, your ears, your mind?  Whence
the profusion that supplies even our luxury?  For it is not merely our
necessities that are provided - we are loved to the point of being
spoiled!  Whence all the trees yielding their varied fruits, all the
healing plants, all the different sorts of foods distributed
throughout the whole year, so that even the slothful find sustenance
from the chance produce of the earth?  Whence, too, the living
creatures of every kind, some born upon dry and solid ground, others
in the waves, others that descend through the air, in order that every
part of Nature's domain might pay to us some tribute?  Whence the
rivers - these that encircle the fields in loveliest curves, those
that, as they flow on in their vast and navigable courses, provide a
channel for commerce, some of which in the days of summer undergo a
wonderful increase in size in order that, by the sudden overflow of
the summer torrent, they may water the parched lands that lie
outstretched beneath a burning sky?  And what of the springs of
healing waters?  What of the warm waters that bubble forth upon the
very coast of the sea?

> And thee, O lordly Larius, and, Benacus, thee,

> Rising with a roar of billows like the sea?

If anyone had made vou a
gift of but a few acres, you would say that you had received a
benefit; and do you say that the illimitable stretches that the earth
opens to you are not a benefit?  If anyone has presented you with
money, and, since this is a great thing in your eyes, has filled your
coffer, you will call it a benefit.  God has planted in the earth
countless mines, has drawn forth from its depths countless rivers that
over the lands where they flow carry down gold; silver and copper and
iron in huge store have been buried in all places, and he has given to
you the means of discovering them by placing upon the surface of the
earth the signs of its hidden treasures yet do you say that you have
received no benefit?  If you should receive the gift of a house that
was resplendent with marble and a ceiling gleaming with gold or decked
out with colours, you would call it no commonplace gift. God has built
for you a huge mansion that need not fear conflagration or ruin, a
house in which you see, not flimsy veneers thinner than the very
blade by which they are sawn, but virgin masses of most precious
stone, whole masses of a substance with such a variety of markings
that the tiniest fragments of it fill you with wonder, and a ceiling
gleaming in one fashion by night, and in another by day - yet do you
say that you have received no gift?  And, though you prize greatly
these blessings that you possess, do you act the part of an ungrateful
man, and consider that you are indebted to no one for them?  Whence do
you have that breath which you draw? Whence that light by which you
distribute and order the acts of your life?  Whence the blood that by
its circulation maintains the heat of life?  Whence those dainties
that by rare flavours excite your palate when it is already sated?
Whence those provocatives of pleasure when it palls?  Whence this
repose in which you wither and rot?  Will you not, if you are
grateful, say i.e., of marble.

> A god for us this ease hath wrought. For he

> Shall ever be a god indeed to me,

> And many a firstling lamb his altar stain From out our flock. You
see what boons I gain

> My oxen by his bounty roam at will,

> While I fond airs upon my pipe can trill?

But God is he who has set free, not a few oxen, but herds throughout
the whole earth, who everywhere supplies food to the flocks as they
range far and wide, who after pastures of summer has provided pastures
of winter, who has not merely taught how to play upon the pipe and to
fashion a tune that, rustic and artless as it is, yet shows some
regard for form, but has invented countless arts, the countless
variations of the voice, the countless tones that will produce
melodies, some by the breath of our body, others by the breath of an
instrument. For you must not say that whatever we have invented is
our own any more than the fact of our growth, or the fact that the
behaviour of our body corresponds with the fixed, periods of life; now
comes the loss of childhood's teeth, now, as age gradually advances
and passes into the hardier stage, puberty and the last tooth that
marks the end of the progress of youth. In us are implanted the seeds
of all ages, the seeds of all the arts, and it is God, our master, who
draws forth from the secret depths of our being our various talents.
"It is Nature," you say, "who supplies me with these things." But do
you not understand that, when you say this, you merely give another
name to to God?  For what else is Natuure but God and the Divine
Reason that pervades the whole universe and all its parts?
{Wordsworth+} You may, as often as you like, address this being who is
the author of this world of ours by different names; it will be right
for you to call him Jupiter Best and Greatest, and the Thunderer and
the Stayer, a title derived, not from the fact that, as the historians
have related, the Roman battle-line stayed its flight in answer to
prayer, but from the fact that all things are stayed by his
benefits, that he is their Stayer and Stabilizer.  If likewise you
should call him Fate, it would be no falsehood; for, since Fate is
nothing but a connected chain of causes, he is the first of all the
causes on which the others depend.  Any name that you choose will be
properly applied to him if it connotes some force that operates in the
domain of heaven - his titles may be as countless as are his benefits.

Our school regard him both as Father Liber and as Hercules and as
Mercury -Father Liber, because he is the father of all things, he who
first discovered the seminal power that is able to subserve life
through pleasure; Hercules, because his power is invincible, and,
whenever it shall have grown weary with fulfilling its works, shall
return into primal fire; Mercury, because to him belong reason and
number and order and knowledge.  In whatever direction you turn, you
will see God coming to meet you; nothing is void of him, he himself
fills all his work. {Wordsworth+} For this reason, O most ungrateful
of mortals, it is futile for you to say that you are indebted, not to
God, but to Nature, for there is no Nature without God, nor God
without Nature, but both are the same thing, they differ only in their
function.  If, having received a gift from Seneca, you were to say
that you were indebted to Annaeus or to Lucius,c you would be
changing, not your creditor, but his name, for, whether you designated
him by his first, his second, or his third name, he would nevertheless
be the same person.  So, if you like, speak of Nature, Fate, Fortune,
but all these are names of the same God, who uses his power in various
ways.  And justice, honesty, prudence, courage, temperance are the
good qualities of only one mind; if you take pleasure in any of these,
you take pleasure in that mind.

But, not to be drawn aside into further controversy, God bestows upon
us very many and very great benefits, with no thought of any return,
since he has no need of having anything bestowed, nor are we capable
of bestowing anything on him; consequently, a benefit is something
that is desirable in itself.  It has in view only the advantage of the
recipient; so, putting aside all interests of our own, let us aim
solely at this. xxx"Yet you say," someone retorts, "that we ought to
take care to select those to whom we would give benefits, since even
the farmer does not commit his seeds to sand; but if this is true,
then in giving benefits we are seeking our own advantage, just as
surely as in ploughing and sowing; for sowing is not something that is
desirable in itself.  Moreover, you inquire where and how you should
bestow a benefit, which there would be no need of doing if giving a
benefit is something that is desirable in itself, since, in whatever
place and in whatever fashion it was bestowed, it would still be a
benefit." But we pursue honour solely for its own sake; yet, even if
we should have no other reason for pursuing it, we do inquire what we
should do and when and how we should do it; for it is just through
these considerations that honour has its being.  And so, when I select
the person to whom I would give a benefit, I am thinking of this - how
and when a gift is a benefit; for if it is given to one who is base,
it can be neither an honourable act nor a benefit.

To restore a deposit is something that is desirable in itself; yet I
shall not always restore it, nor at every time or in every place.
Sometimes it is a matter of indifference whether I deny a deposit or
restore it openly.  I shall always regard the interest of the one to
whom I am intending to restore a deposit, and shall refuse to do so if
it will do him harm.  I shall proceed in the same way in the matter of
a benefit.  I shall consider when to give it, to whom to give it, and
how and why.  For reason should be applied to everything we do and no
gift can be a benefit unless it is given with reason, since every
virtuous act is accompanied by reason.  How often, when men are
reproaching themselves for some thoughtless benefaction, do we hear
the words : "I would rather have lost it than have given it to him"!
Thoughtless benefaction is the most shameful sort of loss, and it is a
much greater offence to have ill bestowed a benefit than to have
received no return; for it is the fault of another if we have received
no return, while, if we did not select the one to whom we were giving,
the fault is our own.  In making my choice no considerations will
influence me so little as the one you suppose - who will be likely to
make me some return; for I choose a person who will be grateful, not
one who is likely to make a return, and it often happens that the
grateful man is one who is not likely to make a return, while the
ungrateful man is one who has made a return.  It is to the heart that
my estimate is directed; consequently I shall pass by the man who,
though rich, is unworthy, and shall give to one who, though poor, is
good; for he will be grateful in the midst of extreme poverty, and,
when he lacks all else, this heart he will still have.  It is not gain
that I try to get from a benefit, nor pleasure, nor glory; content
with giving pleasure to one human being, I shall give with the single
purpose of doing what I ought.  But I am not without choice in doing
what I ought.  Do you ask what the nature of this choice will be I
shall choose a man who is upright, sincere, mindful, grateful,
{integrum+} {simplicem+} {memorem+} {gratum+} keeps his hands from
another man's property, who is not greedily attached to his own, who
is kind to others; although Fortune may bestow upon him nothing with
which be may repay my favour, I shall have accomplished my purpose
when I have made choice of such a man.  If I am made liberal by
self-interest and mean calculation, if my only purpose in doing a
service to a man is to have him in turn do a service to me, I shall
not give a benefit to one who is setting out for distant and foreign
countries, never to return; I shall not give to one who is so ill that
he has no hope of recovery; I shall not give when my own health is
failing, for I shall have no time to receive a return.  And yet, that
you may know that generous action is something desirable in itself,
the foreigner who has just put into our harbour, and will straightway
depart, receives our assistance; to a shipwrecked stranger, in order
that he may sail back home, we both give a ship and equip it.  He
leaves us scarcely knowing who was the author of his salvation, and,
expecting never more to see our faces again, he deputes the gods to be
our debtors, and prays that they may repay the favour in his stead;
meanwhile we rejoice in the consciousness of having given a benefit
that will yield no fruit.  And tell me, when we have reached the very
end of life, and are drawing up our will, do we not dispense benefits
that will yield us nothing?  How much time is spent, how long do we
debate with ourselves to whom and how much we shall give!  For what
difference does it make to whom we give since no one will make us any
return?  Yet never are we more careful in our giving, never do we
wrestle more in making decisions than when, with all self-interest
banished, only the ideal of good remains before our eyes; we are bad
judges of our duties only so long as they are distorted by hope and
fear and that most slothful of vices,{Hal+} pleasure.  But when death
has shut off all these, and has brought us to pronounce sentence as
incorrupt judges, we search for those who are most worthy to inherit
our possessions, and there is nothing that we arrange with more
scrupulous care than this which is of no concern to ourselves. Yet,
heavens! the great joy that comes to us as we think: "Through me this
man will become richer, and I, by increasing his wealth, shall add new
lustre to his high position." If we give only when we may expect some
return, we ought to die intestate!

"You say," someone retorts, "a benefit is a loan that cannot be
repaid; but a loan is not something that is desirable in itself."
{Polonius+} When I use the term "loan," I resort to a figure, a
metaphor; for in the same way I can also say that a law is the measure
of justice and injustice, and a measure is not something desirable in
itself. We resort to such terms for the purpose of making something
clear; when I say a "loan," a quasi-loan is understood.  Do you wish
to know the difference? I add the words "that cannot be repaid,"
whereas every true loan either can or ought to be repaid.  So far from
its being right for us to give a benefit from a motive of
self-interest, often, as I have said, the giving of it must involve
one's own loss and risk.  For instance, I come to the rescue of a man
who has been surrounded by robbers although I am at liberty to pass by
in safety. By defending an accused man, who is battling with
privilege, I turn against.myself a clique of powerful men, and shall
be forced perhaps by the same accusers to put on the mourning that I
have removed from him, although I might take the other side, and look
on in safety at struggles that do not concern me; I go bail for a man
who has been condemned, and, when a friend's goods are put up for
sale, I quash the indictment, and shall probably make myself
responsible for what he owes to his creditors; in order to save a
proscribed person, I myself run the risk of proscription.

No one, when he wishes to acquire an estate at Tusculum or at Tibur
because of their healthfulness and the retreat they afford in summer,
stops to consider at how many years' purchase he is going to buy;
when once he has bought it, he must look after it. In the case of a
benefit the same principle applies; for, when you ask me what the
return will be, I answer, "the reward of a good conscience." What
return does one have from a benefit?  Do you, pray, tell me what
return one has from justice, from innocence, from greatness of soul,
{magnitudo_animi+} from chastity, from temperance; if you seek for
anything besides the virtues themselves, it is not the virtues
themselves that you seek. To what end does heaven perform its
revolutions?  To what end does the sun lengthen and shorten the day?
These are all benefits, for they take place in order to work good to
us.  Just as it is the office of heaven to perform its revolutions in
the fixed order of Nature, and that of the sun to shift the points at
which it rises and sets, and to do these things that are serviceable
to us without any reward, so it is the duty of man, amongst other
things, to give also benefits.  Why, then, does he give?  For fear
that he should fail to give, for fear that he should lose an
opportunity of doing good. {giving_motive+} You count it pleasure to
surrender your miserable body to sluggish ease, to court a repose that
differs not much from sleep, to lurk in a covert of thick shade and
beguile the lethargy of a languid mind with the most delicate
thoughts, which you call tranquillity, and in the secret retreats of
your gardens to stuff with food and drink your bodies that are pallid
from inaction; we count it pleasure to give benefits, even at the
price of labour, if only they will lighten the labours of others, even
at the price of danger, if only they will extricate others from
dangers, even at the expense of burdening our budgets, if only they
will relieve the needs and distresses of others.  What difference does
it make whether my benefits are returned?  Even after they have been
returned, they must be given again.  A benefit views the interest, not
of ourselves, but of the one upon whom it is bestowed; otherwise, it
is to ourselves that we give it.  And so many services that confer the
utmost advantage on others lose claim to gratitude because they are
paid for.  The trader renders service to cities, the physician to the
sick, the slave-monger to those he sells; but all these, because they
arrive at the good of others through seeking their own, do not leave
those whom they serve under any obligation.  That which has gain as
its object cannot be a benefit.  "I shall give so much and get so much
in return " is pure barter.

I should not call that woman chaste who repulses a lover in order to
inflame him, who is afraid either of the law or of her husband.  As
Ovid puts it:

She who sinned not because she could not - sinned.  A woman who owes
her chastity, not to herself, but to fear, is very rightly put in the
class of sinners.  In the same way, he who has given a benefit in
order that he may get something back has really not given it.  At this
rate, we also give a benefit to the animals that we rear in order that
they may provide us either with service or with food!  We give a
benefit to the orchards that we tend in order that they may not suffer
from drought or the hardness of untilled and neglected ground.  But it
is not justice nor goodness that moves anyone to cultivate a field, or
to perform any act that involves some reward apart from the act
itself.  The motive that leads to the giving of a benefit is not
greedy nor mean, but is humane and generous, a desire to give even
when one has already given, and to add new and fresh gifts to old
ones, having as its sole aim the working of as much good as it can for
him upon whom it bestows; whereas it is a contemptible act, without
praise and without glory, to do anyone a service because it is to our
own interest.  What nobleness is there in loving oneself, in sparing
oneself, in getting gain for oneself?  The true desire of giving a
benefit summons us away from all these motives, and, laying hand upon
us, forces us to put up with loss, and, forgoing self-interest, finds
its greatest joy in the mere act of doing good.

Can there be any doubt that the opposite of a benefit is an injury?
Just as doing an injury is something that in itself must be avoided
and shunned, so giving a benefit is something that is desirable in
itself.  In one case, the baseness of the action outweighs all the
rewards that urge us to the crime, in the other, we are incited to the
action by the idea of virtue, which is in itself a powerful incentive.
I shall not be guilty of misstatement if I say that everyone takes
delight in the benefits he does, that everyone is so disposed that he
is made more happy by seeing the one upon whom he has heaped benefits,
that everyone finds in the fact of having given one benefit a reason
for giving a second one.  And this would not happen if the benefits
themselves were not the source of his pleasure.  How often will you
hear a man say: "I cannot bear to desert him, for I have given him his
life, I have rescued him from peril.  He now begs me to plead his
cause against men of influence; I do not want to, but what can I do?
I have already helped him once, no, twice." Do you not see that there
is, inherent in the thing itself, some peculiar power that compels us
to give benefits, first, because we ought, then, because we have
already given them?  Though in the beginning we may have had no reason
for bestowing anything upon a man, we continue to bestow because we
have already bestowed; and so untrue is it that we are moved to give
benefits from a motive of profit, that we persist in maintaining and
cherishing those that are unprofitable, solely from an affection for
the benefit, to which, even though it has been unfortunately placed,
we show indulgence as naturally as we might to children who
misbehave. These same opponents a admit that they themselves return
gratitude, yet not because it is right, but because it is expedient.
But to prove that this is false is an easier task, because the same
arguments by which we have established that to give a benefit is
something that is desirable in itself establish this also.  The one
fixed principle from which we proceed to the proof of other points is
that the honourable is cherished for no other reason than because it
is honourable+.  Who, therefore, will dare to raise the question
whether it is honourable to be grateful?  Who does not loathe the
ungrateful man, a person who is unprofitable even to himself? And tell
me, when you hear it said of someone: "He is ungrateful for very great
benefits," what are your feelings?  Is it as though he had done
something base, or as though he had omitted to do something that was
expedient and likely to be profitable to himself?  I imagine you count
him a worthless fellow, who should have, not a guardian, but
punishment; but this would not be the case unless to be grateful were
something that is desirable in itself and honourable.  Other
qualities, perhaps, manifest their worth less clearly, and, in order
to decide whether they are honourable, we need an interpreter.  This
one is open to the view, and is too beautiful to have its glory dimmed
or obscured.  What is so praiseworthy, upon what are all our minds so
uniformly agreed, as the repayment of good services with gratitude?
Tell me, what is the motive that leads to this?  Gain?  But he who
does not scorn gain is ungrateful.  Vainglory?  And what is there to
boast about in having paid what you owe?  Fear?  The ungrateful man
has none; for this is the only crime for which we have provided no
law, on the theory that Nature has taken sufficient precautions
against it.  Just as there is no law that bids us love our parents or
indulge our children, for it is useless to push us in the direction in
which we are already going, just as no one needs to be urged to self-
love, which seizes him even while he is being born, so, too, there is
none for this, no law that bids us seek the honourable in and for
itself; it pleases us by its very nature, and so attractive is virtue
that even the wicked instinctively approve of the better course. Who
is there who does not wish to seem beneficent? who,even in the midst
of his crimes and injuries, does not aspire to a reputation for
goodness? who does not clothe even his most violent acts with some
semblance of righteousness, and wish to have the appearance of having
given a benefit even to those whom he has injured? {evil_as_good+} And
so men suffer those whom they have ruined to render them thanks, and
they make a pretence of being good and generous because they are not
able to, prove themselves so.  But they would not do this unless the
love of what is right and desirable in itself forced them to seek a
reputation at variance with their characters, and conceal the
wickedness, which they regard with hatred and shame, while they covet
its fruits; no one has ever so far revolted from Nature's law and put
aside humanity as to be evil for the pleasure of it. {Iago+} For ask
any of the men who live by robbery whether they would not prefer to
attain by honourable means the things that they get by brigandage and
theft.  The man who gets his living by highway robbery and by
murdering travellers will desire rather to find his booty than to
snatch it; you will discover no one who would not prefer to enjoy the
rewards of wickedness without the wickedness.  Of all the benefits
that we have from Nature this is the greatest, the fact that Virtue
causes her light to penetrate into the minds of all; even those who do
not follow her see her.

To prove to you that the sentiment of gratitude is something to be
desired in itself, ingratitude is something to be avoided in itself
because there is nothing that so effectually disrupts and destroys the
harmony of the human race as this vice.  For how else do we live in
security if it is not that we help each other by an exchange of good
offices? It is only through the interchange of benefits that life
becomes in some measure equipped and fortified against sudden
disasters.  Take us singly, and what are we?  The prey of all
creatures, their victims, whose blood is most delectable and most
easily secured.  For, while other creatures possess a strength that is
adequate for their self-protection, and those that are born to be
wanderers and to lead an isolated life have been given weapons, the
covering of man is a frail skin; no might of claws or of teeth makes
him a terror to others, naked and weak as he is, his safety lies in
fellowship. {social_animal+}

God has given to him two things, reason and fellowship, which, from
being a creature at the mercy of others, make him the most powerful of
all; and so he who, if he were isolated, could be a match for none is
the master of the world.  Fellowship has given to him dominion over
all creatures; fellowship, though he was begotten upon the land, has
extended his sovereignty to an element not his own, and has bidden him
be lord even upon the sea; it is this that has checked the assaults of
disease, has made ready supports for old age, has provided solace for
sorrow; it is this that makes us brave, this that we may invoke as a
help against Fortune.  Take away this fellowship, and you will sever
the unity of the human race on which its very existence depends; yet
you will take it away if you succeed in proving that ingratitude is to
be avoided, not because of itself, but because it has something to
fear; for how many there are who might safely be ungrateful!  In fine,
any man who is made grateful by fear I call ungrateful.

No sane man fears the gods; for it is madness to fear what is
beneficial, and no one loves those whom he fears.  You, Epicurus, in
the end leave God unarmed, you have stripped him of all his weapons,
of all his power, and, in order that no one may have need to fear him,
you have thrust him beyond the range of fear.  Surrounded, therefore,
as he is, by a vast and impassable wall, and removed beyond the reach
and sight of mortals, you have no reason to stand in awe of him; he
has no means of bestowing either blessing or injury; in the space that
separates our own from some other heaven a he dwells alone, without a
living creature, without a human being, without a possession, and
avoids the destruction of the worlds that crash around and above him,
having no ear for our prayers and no concern for us.  And yet you wish
to seem to worship this being, from a feeling of gratitude, I suppose,
as if he were a father; or, if you do not wish to seem grateful,
because you have from him not a single benefit, but are yourself
merely a combination of atoms and of those mites of yours that have
met blindly and by chance, why do you worship him?  "Because of his
glorious majesty," you say and his exceptional nature." Granting that
you do this, you clearly do it without the inducement of any reward,
of any expectation; there is, therefore, something that is desirable
in itself, whose very worth induces you, that is, the
honourable. {honestum+} But what is more honourable than gratitude?
The opportunity for this virtue is limited only by life. "Bnbsp; "But
this good," you say, "has in it also some element of profit." What
virtue, indeed, has not?  But that is said to be desired because of
itself which, although it possesses some outside advantages, still
pleases even when these have been stripped of and removed.  There is
advantage in being grateful; yet I shall be grateful even if it harms
me.  And what is the aim of one who is grateful?  Is it that his
gratitude may win for him more friends, more benefits?  What, then, if
a man is likely to arouse disfavour by it, if a man knows that, so far
from being likely to gain anything by it, he must lose much from the
store that he has already acquired, does he not gladly submit to his
losses?  He is ungrateful who in the act of repaying gratitude has an
eye on a second gift -who hopes while he repays. I call him ungrateful
who sits at the bedside of a sick man because he is going to make his
will, who finds room for an thought of an inheritance or a legacy.
Though he should do everything that a good and thoughtful friend ought
to do, if his mind is haunted by the hope of gain, he is only a fisher
for legacies an is just dropping his hook.  As birds of prey that feed
upon carcasses keep watch near by the flocks that are spent with
disease and are ready to drop, so such a man gloats over a death-bed
and hovers about the corpse.

But the grateful heart is attracted by the very excellence of its
purpose.  Do you wish proof that this is so, and that it is not
corrupted by the idea of profit?  There are two classes of grateful
men.  One man is said to be grateful because he has made return for
something that he received; he, perhaps,is able to make himself
conspicuous, has something to boast about, something to publish.  He,
too, is said to be grateful who has accepted a benefit in good spirit,
who owes in good spirit; this man keeps his gratitude shut up in his
heart.  What profit can he gain from this hidden feeling? Yet such a
man, even if he is able to do no more than this, is grateful. He
loves, is conscious of his debt, desires to repay the favour; whatever
else you may find wanting, nothing is wanting in the man himself.  A
man may be an artist even if he does not have at hand the tools for
practising his craft, nor is one less a trained singer if the noise of
those who are crying him down does not permit his voice to be heard.
I wish to repay a favour: after this something is left for me to do,
not in order to become grateful, but in order to become free; for it
often happens that he who has repaid a favour is ungrateful, and he
who has not repaid it is grateful. For, as in the case of all the
others, the true estimate of this virtue is concerned wholly with the
heart; if this does its duty, whatever else is lacking is the fault of
Fortune.  Just as a man can be fluent in speech even if he is silent,
brave even if his hands are folded, or even tied, just as a man can be
a pilot even when he is on dry land, since there is no deficiency in
the completeness of his knowledge even though something prevents him
from using it, so also a man is grateful who only wishes to be so, and
has none besides himself to bear witness to this desire.  And I will
go even further than this - sometimes a man is grateful even when he
appears to be ungrateful, when rumour with its evil tongue has given
the opposite report of him.  What guide has this man but his own
conscience?  Crushed though it be, this gives him cheer, this cries
out against the mob and hearsay, and relies wholly upon itself, and,
when it sees the vast crowd of those on the other side who think
differently, it does not take trouble to count votes, but wins the
victory by its single vote.  If it sees its own loyalty subjected to
the chastisements reserved for treachery, it does not descend from its
pinnacle, but abides there superior to its punishment. "I have," it
says, "what I wished, what I strove for; I do not regret it, nor shall
I ever regret it, and no injustice of Fortune shall ever bring me to
such a pass that she will hear me say: 'What was it I wished?  What
profit have I now from my good intention?'" I have profit even on the
rack, I have profit even in the fire; though fire should devour my
limbs one by one, and gradually encircle my living body, though my
very heart, brimming with conscious virtue, should drip with blood, it
will delight in the flame through which its loyalty will shine forth.

The following argument also, although it has already been used, may be
reapplied here: why is it that we wish to be grateful at the hour of
death, that we carefully weigh the services of each one, that, with
memory as judge of the whole of our life, we try to avoid the
appearance of having forgotten the service of any?  Nothing then is
left for us to hope for; nevertheless, as we pause upon the
threshwold, e wish to appear as grateful as possible at the time of
our departure from human affairs.  It is evident that the great reward
for an action lies in the deed itself, and that virtue has great power
in influencing the minds of men, for souls are flooded with its
beauty, and, marvelling at the brilliance and splendour of it, are
transported with enchantment.  "But there are many advantages," you
say, "that spring from it; good men live in greater security, and have
the love and respect of good men, and existence is less troubled when
accompanied by innocence and gratitude." Nature would, indeed, have
been most unjust if she had made so great a good an unhappy and
uncertain and unfruitful thing.  But the point to consider is whether
you would turn your steps toward this virtue, which often is reached
by a safe and easy way, even though the path lay over rocks and
precipices, and was beset with wild beasts and serpents.  It is not
true, therefore, that that which has also some extraneous profit
closely attached to it is not something to be desired in itself; for
in most cases the things that are most beautiful are accompanied by
many accessory advantages, but they follow in the train of beauty
while she leads the way.  Does anyone doubt that the sun and the moon
in their periodic revolutions exercise an influence upon this
abiding-place of the human race?  That the heat of the one gives life
to our bodies, loosens the hard earth, reduces excessive moisture, and
breaks off the bonds of gloomy winter that enchains all things, while
the warmth of the other with its efficacious and pervasive power
dtermines the ripening of the crops?  That there is some relation
between human fecundity and the course of the moon?  That the one by
its circuit marks out the year, and the other, moving in a smaller
orbit, the month?  Yet, although these advantages should be removed,
would not the sun itself form a fitting spectacle for our eyes, and be
worthy of our adoration if it merely passed across the sky?  Would not
the moon be a sight worthy of our eyes even if it traversed heaven as
idly as a star? And the firmament itself - who is not held spellbound
by it whenever it pours forth its fires by night and glitters with its
horde of countless stars?  Who, when he marvels at them, stops to
think of their utility to himself?  Behold the mighty company as it
glides by overhead, how, under the appearance of an organism that is
immovable and at rest, its members conceal from us their speed.  How
much takes place in that night of which we take note only for the
purpose of numbering and distinguishing the days! What a multitude of
events is being unrolled beneath this silence!  What a chain of
destiny is being traced by their unerring path!  These bodies, which
you imagine have been strewn about for no other purpose than for
ornament, are one and all at work.  For there is no reason why you
should suppose that there are only seven wandering stars, and that all
the others are fixed; there are a few whose movements we apprehend,
but, farther removed from our sight, are countless divinities a that
go their rounds, and very many of those that our eyes can reach
proceed at an imperceptible pace and veil their movements.  Tell me,
would you not be captivated by the sight of such a mighty structure
even if it did not cover you, guard you, cherish you and give vou
birth, and permeate you with its spirit?  As the heavenly bodies have
primarily their use, and are necessary and vital to us, while it is
their majesty that wholly occupies our minds, so virtue in general,
and particularly that of gratitude, while it does indeed bestow much
upon us, does not wish to be cherished because of this; it has in it
something more, and he who counts it merely among the useful things
has not properly comprehended it.  Is a man grateful because it is to
his advantage?  Accordingly, also,to the extent that it is to his
advantage?  But Virtue does not open her door to a niggardly lover; he
must come to her with an open purse.  It is the ungrateful man who
thinks: "I should have liked to return gratitude, but I fear the
expense, I fear the danger, I shrink from giving offence; I would
rather consult my own interest." It is not possible to render men
grateful and ungrateful by the same line of reasoning; as their
actions are different, their intentions are different. The one is
ungrateful, although he ought not to be, because it is to his
interest; the other is grateful, although it is not to his interest,
because he ought to be.  It is our aim to live according to Nature,
and to follow the example of the gods.  Yet, in all their acts, what
inducement have the gods other than the very principle of action?
Unless perchance you suppose that they obtain a reward for their deeds
from the smoke of burnt offerings and the odour of incense!  See the
gigantic efforts they make every day, the great largesses they
dispense; with what wealth of crops they fill the land, with what
favourable winds that bear us to all shores they ruffle the seas, with
what mighty rains, suddenly hurled down, they soften the soil, renew
the dried sources of springs, and, flooding them with secret
nourishment, give them new life!  They do all these things without any
reward, without attaining any advantage for themselves.  Our rule
also, if it would not depart from its model, should observe this
principle of never proceeding to virtuous acts for pay.  We should be
ashamed to set a price on any benefit whatsoever - the gods are ours
for nothing! {nature_according_to}

"If you are imitating the gods," you say, "then bestow benefits also
upon the ungrateful; for the sun rises also upon the wicked, and the
sea lies open also to pirates." This point raises the question whether
a good man would bestow a benefit upon one who was ungrateful, knowing
that he was ungrateful.  Permit me here to put in a brief remark for
fear that we may be trapped by the tricky question.  Understand that,
according to the system of the Stoics, there are two classes of
ungrateful persons.  One man is ungrateful because he is a fool+; a
fool is also a bad man a because he is a bad man, he possesses every
vice: therefore he is also ungrateful.  Thus we say that all bad men
are intemperate, greedy, voluptuous, and spiteful, not because every
individual has all these vices in a great or marked degree, but
because he is capable of having them; and he does have them even if
they are not visible.  Another man is ungrateful, and this is the
common meaning of the term, because he has a natural tendency to this
vice.  To an ingrate of the first type, the man who possesses this
fault for the reason that there is no fault that he does not possess,
a good man will give his benefit; for, if he were to eliminate all
such men, there would be no one to whom he could give.  To the ingrate
of the second type, the man who in the matter of benefits shows
himself a cheat, and has a natural bent in this direction, he will no
more give a benefit than he will lend money to a spendthrift, or
entrust a deposit to a man whom many have already found false.  There
is the man who is called timid because he is a fool; and because of
this he is classed with the bad men who are beset by all vices without
distinction and without exception.  But, strictly speaking, a timid
man is one who because of a natural weakness grows alarmed even at
unmeaning noises.  The fool possesses all vices, but he is not
inclined by nature to all; one man inclines to greed, another to
luxury, another to insolence.  Therefore it is a mistake for persons
to put such questions as these to the Stoics: "Tell me, is Achilles
timid?  Tell me, is Aristides, whose name stood for justice, unjust?
Tell me, is even Fabius, who retrieved the situation by his delays,"
rash?  Tell me, is Decius afraid of death?  Mucius a traitor?
Camillus a deserter?" We do not say that all men possess all vices in
the same way in which certain men display particular vices, but that
the bad and foolish man is not exempt from any vice; we do not acquit
even the bold man of fear, nor absolve even the spendthrift from
avarice.  Just as a man has all the five senses, and yet all men do
not for that reason have as keen sight as Lynceus so, if a man is a
fool, he does not possess all the vices in the same active and
vigorous form in which some persons possess some of them.  All the
vices exist in all men, yet not all are equally prominent in each
individual. This man's nature impels him to greed; this one is a
victim of wine, this one of lust, or, if he is not yet a victim, he is
so constituted that his natural impulses lead him in this direction.

And so, to return to my original proposition, everyone who is bad is
ungrateful, for he has in him all the seeds of wrongdoing; yet,
strictly speaking, the man who is termed ungrateful is one who has a
bent toward this vice.  To such a man, consequently, I shall not give
a benefit.  As a father who betroths his daughter to an overbearing
man who has been often divorced will disregard her best interests, as
he who entrusts the care of his patrimony to one who has been
condemned for the bad management of his affairs will be considered a
poor head of a household, as it will be the veriest madness for a man
to make a will naming as the guardian of his son one who is known to
be a robber of wards, so he will be counted the worst of benefactors
who chooses ungrateful persons in order to bestow upon them gifts that
are doomed to perish.  "Even the gods," you say, "confer many
blessings upon the ungrateful." But they designed them for the good;
yet the bad also share in them because they cannot be separated from
the others.  It is better, too, to benefit also the bad for the sake
of the good than to fail the good for the sake of the bad.  So the
blessings you cite - the day, the sun, the succession of summer and
winter and the intermediate seasons of spring and autumn with their
milder temperature, rains and springs to drink from, and winds that
blow in fixed season - these the gods have devised for the good of
all; they could not make an exception of individuals.  A king gives
honours to the worthy, but largesses even to the unworthy; the thief
no less than the perjurer and the adulterer and everyone, without
distinction of character, whose name appears on the register receives
grain from the state; whatever else a man may be, he gets his dole,
not because he is good; but because he is a citizen, and the good and
the bad share alike.  God also has given certain gifts to the whole
human race, and from these no man is shut out. For, while it was to
the common good that traffic in the sea should be open to all, and
that the kingdom of mankind should be enlarged, it was impossible to
cause the same wind to be favourable for the good and adverse for the
bad; nor was it possible to appoint a law for the fall of the rains in
order that they might not descend upon the fields of wicked and
dishonest men.  Certain blessings are offered to all.  Cities are
founded as much for the bad as for the good; works of genius, even if
they will fall into the hands of the unworthy, are published for
everybody; medicine points out its healing power even to criminals; no
one has banned the compounding of wholesome remedies for fear that
they may heal the unworthy.  In the case of the gifts that are
specifically bestowed because the recipient is worthy, apply the rule
of censorship and of rating the person, but not so in the case of
those that are open to the mob.  There is a great difference between
not excluding a man and choosing him.  Justice is vouchsafed even to
the thief; even murderers taste the blessings of peace; those who have
stolen the property of others even recover their own; assassins and
those who ply their swords on the city streets are protected from the
public enemy by the city wall; the laws shield with their protection
those who have sinned most against them.  There are certain blessings
that could not have fallen to a few unless they were given to all;
there is no need, therefore, for you to argue about the benefits to
which we have received a public invitation.  But that which must go to
a beneficiary of my own choosing will not be given to a man whom I
know to be ungrateful. xxx"Will vou, then," you ask, "neither give
counsel to an ungratefull man when he is perplexed, nor permit him to
have a drink of water, nor point out the path to him if he has lost
his way?  Or will you do all these services, and yet not be making a
gift?" Here I shall draw a distinction, or at least endeavour to do
so.  A benefit is a useful service, but not every useful service is a
benefit; for some services are too small to have the right to be
called benefits.  In order to produce a benefit, there must be a
combination of two conditions.  The first is the importance of the
service; for there are some that fall short of the dignity of the
claim.  Who ever called a morsel of bread a benefit, or tossing anyone
a copper, or enabling, him to get a light?  And sometimes these are
more helpful than very large gifts; yet, for all that, their cheapness
detracts from their value even when the necessity of the moment has
made them necessities.  A second condition, which is most important,
that must supplement the other, is that the motive of my action must
be the interest of the one for whom the benefit is destined, that I
should deem him worthy of it, should bestow it willingly and derive
pleasure from my gift; but none of those services of which we were
just speaking bears any of these marks, for we bestow them, not with
the thought that the recipients are worthy, but carelessly and as mere
trifles, and our gift is made, not so much to a man, as to humanity.
I shall not deny that sometimes I shall give even to the unworthy in
order to do honour to others; as, for instance, in the competition for
public office some of the most disreputable men are preferred to
others who are industrious, but of no family, by reason of their noble
birth, and not without reason.  For sacred is the memory of great
virtues, and more people find pleasure in being good, if the influence
of good men does not end with their lives.  To what did Cicero's son
owe the consulship if not to his father?  What recently took Cinna
from the camp of the enemy, and raised him to the consulship, what
Sextus Pompeius and the other Pompeii, unless it was the greatness of
one man, who once reached such a height that even his downfall
sufficed to exalt all his descendants?  What recently made Fabius
Persicus a priest in more than one college, a man whose kiss even
the shameless counted an insult?  What but a Verrucosus and an
Allobrogicus and the famous three hundred, who, to save their
country, blocked the invasion of the enemy with their single family?
This is the duty we owe to the virtuous - to honour them, not only
when they are present with us, but even when they have been taken from
our sight; as they have made it their aim, not to confine their
services to one age alone, but to leave behind their benefits even
after they themselves have passed away, so let us not confine our
gratitude to one age alone.  So-and-so was the father of great men:
whatever he may be, he is worthy of our benefits; he has given us
worthy sons.  So-and-so is descended from glorious ancestors: whatever
he may be, let him find refuge under the shadow of his ancestry.  As
filthy places become bright from the radiance of the sun, so let the
degenerate shine in the light of their forefathers.

At this point, Liberalis, I wish to offer a defence of the gods.  For
sometimes we are moved to say: "What could Providence mean by putting
on the throne an Arrhidaeus?" Was it to him, think you, that the
honour was accorded?  It was accorded to his father and to his
brother.  "Why did it make Gaius Caesar the ruler of the world? - a
man so greedy of human blood that he ordered it to be shed in his
presence as freely as if he intended to catch the stream in his
mouth!" But tell me, do you think that it was to him this was
accorded? It was accorded to his father Germanicus, to his grandfather
and to his great- grandfather, and to others before them, men who were
no less glorious, even if they passed their lives as private citizens
on a footing of equality with others.  Why, when you yourself were
supporting Mamercus Scaurus for the consulship, were you not aware
that he would try to catch in his open mouth the menstrual discharge
of his own maidservants?  Did he himself make any mystery of it?  Did
he wish to appear to be decent?  I will repeat to you a story that he
told on himself - it went the rounds, I recall, and was recounted in
his presence.  To Annius Pollio who was lying down he had proposed,
using an obscene word, an act that he was more ready to submit to, and
when he saw Pollio frown, he added; "If there is anything bad in what
I have said, may it fall upon me and my head!" This story he used to
tell against himself.  Is it this man, so openly obscene, that you
have admitted to the fasces and the tribunal?  Of course it was while
you were thinking of the great old Scaurus, who was president of the
senate, and chafing to see his offspring obscure!

The gods, it is probable, act in the same manner--some are treated
with more indulgence because of their parents and ancestors, others
because of their grandchildren and great- grandchildren and the long
line of their descendants, whose qualities are as yet unrevealed; for
the gods know well the complete evolution of their work, and the
knowledge of all that will hereafter pass through their hands is
always to them clearly revealed.  The events that appear suddenly to
us out of the unkdown, and all that we count unexpected are to them
familiar happenings, long foreseen. {Pope+}

God says Let these men be kings {Divine_Right+} because their
forefathers have not been, because they have regarded justice and
unselfishness as their highest authority, because, instead of
sacrificing the state to themselves, they have sacrificed themselves
to the state.{Civic_Duty+} Let these others reign, because some one of
their grandsires before them was a good man who displayed a soul
superior to Fortune, who, in times of civil strife, preferred to be
conquered than to conquer, because in this way he could serve the
interest of the state.  Despite the long lapse of time, it has not
been possible to pay to him the debt of gratitude; out of regard for
him, now let this other rule over the people, not because he has the
knowledge or the ability, but because another has served in his place.
This one is deformed in body, hideous in aspect, and will bring
ridicule upon the insignia of his office; then men will blame me, they
will say that I am blind and rash, that I little know what disposition
I am making of honours that are due to none but the greatest and
loftiest of men; yet I am well aware that I am making this gift to one
man, and thereby paying an ancient debt to another.  How can these
critics know that hero of old, who persistently fled from the glory
that followed him, who, going into danger, had the air that others
show when they return from danger, who never separated his own
interest from that of the state? 'Where,' you ask, 'is this man, or
who is he?' But how could you know these things?  It is for me to
balance the debits and credits of such accounts, I know what and to
whom I owe. Some I repay after a long term, others in advance, and
according as opportunity and the resources of my governance permit."
Consequently, I, too, shall sometimes bestow certain gifts on an
ungrateful man, but not because of the man himself.

"Tell me," you say, "if you do not know whether a man is grateful or
ungrateful, will you wait until you do know, or will you refuse to
lose the opportunity of giving a benefit?  To wait is a long matter, -
for, as Plato says, the human heart is hard to divine, - not to wait
hazardous." Our answer to this will be that we never wait for absolute
certainty, since the discovery of truth is difficult, but follow the
path that probable truth shows.  All the business of life proceeds in
this way. It is thus that we sow, that we sail the sea, that we serve
in the army, that we take wives, that we rear children ; since in all
these actions the issue is uncertain, we follow the course that we
believe offers the hope of success.  For who will promise to the sower
a harvest, to the sailor a port, to the soldier a victory, to a
husband a chaste wife, to a father dutiful children?  We follow, not
where truth, but where reason, directs us.  If you wait to do only
what is assured of success and to have only the knowledge that comes
from ascertained truth, all activity is given up, and life comes to a
halt.  Since it is, not truth, but the probable truth, that impels me
in one direction or another, I shall give my benefit to the man who in
all probability will be grateful.

"Many circumstances," you say, "will arise that will enable a bad man
to steal into the place of a good one, and the good man will lose
favour instead of the bad one; for appearances are deceptive, and it
is these we trust." Who denies it?  Yet I find nothing else from which
to form an opinion.  These are the footprints I must follow in my
search for truth, I have nothing that is more trustworthy; I shall
take pains to consider these with all possible care, and shall not be
hasty in granting my assent.  For the same thing may happen in battle,
and my hand, deceived by some mistake, may direct my weapon against a
comrade, and spare an enemy as though he were a friend; but this will
happen but rarely, and from no fault of my own, for my intention is to
smite the enemy, and to defend my countryman.  If I know that a man is
ungrateful, I shall not give him a benefit.  Yet if he has tricked me,
if he has imposed upon me, no blame attaches to the giver because I
made the gift supposing that the man would be grateful.

"Suppose," you say, "that you have promised to give a benefit, and
later have discovered that the man is ungrateful, will you or will you
not bestow it?  If you do so knowinlylv you do wrong, for you give to
one to whom vou ought not to give; if you refuse, you likewise do
wrong - you do not give to one to whom you promised to give.  This
case would upset your conscience and your proud assurance that the
wise man never regrets his action, or amends what he has done, or
changes his purpose." The wise man does not change his purpose if the
situation remains as it was when he formed it; he is never filled with
regret because at the time nothing better could have been done than
was done, no better decision could have been made than was made; yet
all that he undertakes is subject to the reservation: "If nothing
happens to prevent." If we say that all his plans prosper, and that
nothing happens contrary to his expectation, it is because he has
presupposed that something might happen to thwart his designs.  It is
the imprudent man who is confident that Fortune is plighted to
himself; the wise man envisages her in both of her aspects; he knows
how great is the chance of mistake, how uncertain are human affairs,
how many obstacles block the success of our plans; he follows alert
the doubtful and slippery course of chance, weighs uncertain outcome
against his certainty of purpose.  But the reservation without which
he makes no plan, undertakes nothing, protects him here also.  I have
promised a benefit in case nothing occurs to show that I ought not to
give it.  For what if my country should bid me give to her what I have
promised to another?  What if a law should be passed, forbidding
anyone to do what I had promised that I would do for my friend?
Suppose I have promised you my daughter in marriage, but find out
later that you are not a citizen; I have no right to contract a
marriage with a foreigner; the same circumstance that forbids it
provides my defence.  Only then shall I be breaking faith, only then
shall I listen to a charge of inconstancy, if I fail to fulfil a
promise though all the circumstances remain the same as they were when
I made my promise; otherwise, any chance that takes place gives me the
liberty of revising my decision, and frees me from my pledge.  Suppose
I have promised my legal assistance, but afterwards discover that a
precedent was being sought from that case to harm my father; suppose I
have promised that I will go abroad, but word is brought that the way
is beset with robbers; suppose I was about to go to keep an
appointment, but am detained by the illness of my son or by my wife's
confinement.  If you are to hold me to the fulfilment of my promise+
all the circumstances must remain the same as they were when I
promised; but what greater change can there be than my discovery that
you are a bad and ungrateful man?  I shall refuse to an unworthy man
what I was willing to give to him supposing him to be worthy, and I
shall even have reason to be angry because I was deceived.

Nevertheless I shall also examine into the value of the gift in
question; for the amount of the sum promised will help my decision.
If it is a trifle, I shall give it to you, not because you deserve it,
but because I have promised, and I shall not count it as a gift, but
shall keep my word, and give my ear a twitch.  I shall punish my
rashness in promising by suffering loss: "You see how sorry you are
for yourself; next time take more care before you speak!" As the
saying is, I shall pay for my tongue.  If the amount is a larger one,
"I shall not," as Maecenas puts it, "let my punishment cost me ten
million sesterces." For I shall match the two sides of the question
one against the other. There is something in abiding by what you have
promised; on the other hand, there is much in the principle of not
bestowing a benefit on one who is unworthy.  Yet how great is this
benefit?  If it is a slight one, let us wink at it; if, however, it is
likely to cause me either great loss or shame, should rather excuse
myself once for having refused it than ever afterward for having given
it.  It all depends, I say, upon how much value I attach to the letter
of my promise.  I shall not only keep back what I have rashly
promised, but shall demand back what I have wrongly given.  The man is
mad who keeps a promise that was a mistake.

Philip, king of the Macedonians, had a soldier who was a valiant
fighter, and, having found his services useful in many campaigns, he
had from time to time presented him with some of the booty as a reward
for his prowess, and, by his repeated bounties, was exciting the venal
spirit of the man.  Once after being shipwrecked he was cast ashore
upon the estate of a certain Macedonian; this one, when he heard the
news, rushed to his help, resuscitated his breath, brought him to his
farmhouse, surrendered to him his bed, restored him from a weak and
half- dead condition to new life, cared for him for thirty days at his
own expense, put him upon his feet, provided him with money for his
journey, and heard him say over and over: "I will; how you my
gratitude if only I have the good fortune to see my commander." To
Philip he gave an account of his shipwreck, but said nothing of the
help he had received, and promptly asked Philip to present him with a
certain man's estate.  The man was, in fact, his host, the very one
who had rescued him, who had restored him to health.  Kings sometimes,
especially in time of war, make many gifts with their eyes
closed. "One just man is no match for so many armed men fired with
greed, it is not possible for any mortal to be a good man and a good
general at the same time.  How will he satiate so many thousands of
insatiable men?  What will they have if every man has only what is his
own?  So Philip communed with himself as he gave order that the
soldier should be put in possession of the property he asked for.  The
other, however, when he was expelled from his property, did not, like
a peasant, endure his wrong in silence, thankful that he himself had
not been included in the present, but wrote a concise and outspoken
letter to Philip.  Upon receiving this, Philip was so enraged that he
immediately ordered Pausanias to restore the property to its former
owner, and, besides, to brand that most dishonourable of soldiers,
most ungrateful of guests, most greedy of shipwrecked men with letters
showing him to be an ungrateful person.  He, indeed, deserved, not
merely to be branded with those letters, but to have them carved in
his flesh - a man who had cast out his own host to lie like a naked
and shipwrecked sailor upon that shore on which he himself had lain.
But we shall heed within what limits the punishment ought to be kept;
he had, in any case, to be deprived of what he had seized with the
utmost villainy.  Yet who would be moved by his punishment?  He had
committed a crime which could stir no pitiful heart to pity him.

Will a Philip give to you because he promised, even at the price of
sacrificing duty, even at the price of committing an injustice, even
at the price of committing a crime, even at the price of closing all
shores to the shipwrecked by this one act?  There is no fickleness in
leaving a wrong course when it has been recognized as such and
condemned, and we must confess frankly: "I thought it was different, I
have been deceived." It is but the stubbornness of foolish pride to
declare: "What I have once said, be it what it may, shall remain fixed
and unaltered." There is nothing wrong in changing a plan when the
situation is changed.  Tell me, if Philip had left the soldier in
possession of the shores that he had obtained by shipwreck, is it not
true that he would thereby have cut off all unfortunates from fire and
water?  "Rather do you," he said, "within the bounds of my kingdom
carry everywhere upon your most brazen brow these letters that ought
to be stamped upon all men's eyes.  Go, show how sacred a thing is the
table of hospitality; display upon your countenance that decree, for
all to read, which keeps it from being a capital crime to shelter the
unfortunate beneath one's roof!  This ordinance will thus have more
authority than if I had engraved it upon bronze." "Why, then," you
say, "did your master Zeno, when he had promised a loan of five
hundred denarii to a man, and had himself discovered that he was an
altogether unsuitable person, persist in making the loan because he
had promised it, although his friends advised him not to give it?" In
the first place, one set of terms applies to a loan, another to a
benefit.  It is possible to recall money even if it has been badly
placed; I can summon a debtor to pay on a given date, and, if he has
gone bankrupt, I shall get my share; but a benefit is lost wholly and
immediately. Besides, the one is the act of a bad man, the other of a
bad manager.  Again, if the sum had been a larger one, not even Zeno
would have persisted in lending it.  It was only five hundred denarii,
an amount, as we say, "one can spend on an illness," - and not to
break his promise+ was worth that much.  I will go out to dinner
because I have promised, even if the weather is cold; but not so if
there is a snowstorm.  I will rise from my table because I have
promised to attend a betrothal, although I have not digested my food;
but not so if I shall have a fever. I will go down to the forum in
order to go bail for you because I have promised; but not so if you
ask me to go bail for an uncertain amount, if you place me under
obligation to the treasury. There is understood, I say, the
unexpressed reservations: "If I can, if I ought,if things remain
so-and- so."  When you exact fulfilment, see to it that the situation
is the same as it was when I promised; then, if I fail, I shall be
guilty of fickleness.  If something new has happened, why are you
surprised that my intention has changed, since conditions have changed
since I promised? Put everything back as it was, and I shall be as I
was.  We promise to appear in court, yet not all are liable to
prosecution if they default - a major necessity excuses the
defaulter. {promises+}

To the further question of whether in every case we ought to show
gratitude, and whether a benefit ought in all cases to be returned,
consider that I make the same reply.  It is my duty to show a grateful
heart, but sometimes my own ill fortune, sometimes the good fortune of
the one to whom I am indebted, will not permit me to show
gratitude. For what return can I make to a king, what to a rich man if
I am poor, particularly since some men regard it as an ijustice to
have their benefit returned, and are continually piling benefits upon
benefits?  In the case of such persons, what more can I do than have
the desire?  Nor, indeed, ought I to refuse a fresh benefit simply
because I have not yet repaid an earlier one.  I shall accept it as
willingly as it is given, and I shall allow my friend to find in me an
ample opportunity for exercising his goodness.  He who is unwilling to
accept new benefits must resent those already received.  I may not
testify my gratitude - but what does it matter?  I am not responsible
for the delay if I lack either the opportunity or the means.  He of
course, had both the opportunity and the means when he bestowed his
benefit upon me.  Is he a good man or a bad man?  Before a good judge
I have a good case; before a bad one I do not plead my case.  Nor do I
think that we ought to do this either - to hasten to show gratitude
even against the will of those to whom we show it, and to press it
upon them although they draw back.  It is not displaying gratitude to
repay something that you have willingly accepted to someone who is
unwilling to accept it.  Some people, when a trifling gift has been
sent to them, forthwith, quite unseasonably, send back another, and
then declare that they are under no obligation; but to send something
back at once, and to wipe out a gift with a gift is almost a repulse.
Sometimes, too, I shall not return a benefit although I am able.
When?  When I myself shall lose more than the other will gain, when he
will not be aware of any increase of his store in taking back that
which will cause me great loss by being returned.  He who hastens at
all odds to make return shows the feeling, not of a person that is
grateful, but of a debtor.  And, to put it briefly, he who is too
eager to pay his debt is unwilling to be indebted, and he who is
unwilling to be indebted is ungrateful.
