UCIUS ANNAEUS SENECA TO AEBUTIUS LIBERALIS
 

 ON BENEFITS BOOK I

AMONG the many and diverse errors of those who live reckless and
thoughtless lives, almost nothing that I can mention, excellent
Liberalis, is more disgraceful than the fact that we do not know how
either to give or to receive benefits.  For it follows that, if they
are ill placed, they are ill acknowledged, and, when we complain of
their not being returned, it is too late for they were lost at the
time they were given.  Nor is it surprising that among all our many
and great vices, none is so common as ingratitude. This I observe
results from several causes.

The first is, that we do not pick out those who are worthy of
receiving our gifts.  Yet when we are about to open an account with
anyone, we are careful to inquire into the means and manner of life of
our debtor; we do not sow seed in worn-out and unproductive soil; but
our benefits we give, or rather throw, away without any
discrimination.

Nor would it be easy to say whether it is more shameful to repudiate a
benefit, or to ask the repayment of it; for from the nature of such a
trust, we have a right to receive back only what is voluntarily
returned.  To plead bankruptcy is, surely, most disgraceful, just for
the reason that, in order to perform the promised payment, what is
needed is, not wealth, but the desire; for, if a benefit is
acknowledged, it is returned.  But, while those who do not even
profess to be grateful are blameworthy, so also are we. Many men we
find ungrateful, but more we make so, because at one time we are harsh
in our reproaches and demands, at another, are fickle and repent of
our gift as soon as we have made it, at another, are fault - finding
and misrepresent the importance of trifles.  Thus we destroy all sense
of gratitude, not only after we have given our benefits, but even
while we are in the act of giving them.  Who of us has been content to
have a request made lightly, or but once?  Who, when he suspected that
something was being sought from him, has not knit his brows, turned
away his face, pretended to be busy, by long-drawn conversation, which
he purposely kept from ending, deprived another of the opportunity of
making a request, and by various tricks baffled his pressing needs?
Who, when actually caught in a corner, has not either deferred the
favor, that is, been too cowardly to refuse it, or promised it with
ungraciousness, with frowning brows, and with grudging words that were
scarcely audible?  Yet no one is glad to be indebted for what he had,
not received, but extorted.  Can anyone be grateful to another for a
benefit that has been haughtily flung to him, or thrust at him in
anger, or given out of sheer weariness in order to save further
trouble? Whoever expects that a man whom he has wearied by delay and
tortured by hope will feel any indebtedness deceives himself.  A
benefit is acknowledged in the same spirit in which it is bestowed,
and for that reason it ought not to be bestowed carelessly; for a man
thanks only himself for what he receives from an unwitting giver. Nor
should it be given tardily, since, seeing that in every service the
willingness of the giver counts for much, he who acts tardily has for
a long time been unwilling.  And, above all, it should not be given
insultingly; for, since human nature is so constituted that injuries
sink deeper than kindnesses, and that, while the latter pass quickly
from the mind, the former are kept persistently in memory, what can he
expect who, while doing a favor, offers an affront?  If you pardon
such a man for giving a benefit, you show gratitude enough, There is
no reason, however, why the multitude of ingrates should make us more
reluctant to be generous.  For, in the first place, as I have said, we
ourselves increase their number; and, in the second place, not even
the mortal gods are deterred from showing lavish and unceasing
kindness to those who are sacrilegious and indifferent to them.  For
they follow their own nature, and in their universal bounty
{great_soul+} include even those who are ill interpreters of their
gifts.  Let us follow these as our guides in so far as human weakness
permits; let us make our benefits, not investments, but gifts+.  The
man who, when he gives, has any thought of repayment deserves to be
deceived.  But suppose it has turned out ill.  Both children and wives
have disappointed our hopes, yet we marry and rear children, and so
persistent are we in the face of experience that, after being
conquered, we go back to war and, after being shipwrecked, we go back
to sea.  How much more fitting to persevere in bestowing benefits!
For if a man stops giving them because they were not returned, his
purpose in giving them was to have them returned, and he supplies a
just excuse to the in ingrate, whose disgrace lies in not making a
return, it is permissible. {GIFT+} How many are unworthy of seeing the
light!  Yet the day dawns.  How many complain because they have been
born!  Yet Nature begets new progeny, and even those who would rather
not have been, she suffers to be.  To seek, not the fruit of benefits,
but the mere doing of them, and to search for a good man even after
the discovery of bad men - this is the mark of a soul that is truly
great and good.  What glory would there be in doing good to many if
none ever deceived you?  But as it is, it is a virtue to give benefits
that have no surety of being returned, whose fruit is at once enjoyed
by the noble mind.  So true is it that we ought not to allow such a
consideration to rout us from our purpose and make us less prone to do
a very beautiful thing, that, even were I deprived of the hope of
finding a grateful man, I should prefer not recovering benefits to not
giving them, because he who does not give them merely forestalls the
fault of the ungrateful man.  I will explain what I mean.  He who does
not return a benefit, sins more, he who does not give one, sins
earlier.

 To shower bounties on the mob should you delight, xxx Full many must
you lose, for one you place aright./a In the first verse two points
are open to criticism for, on the one hand, benefits ought not to be
showered upon the mob, and, on the other, it is not right to be
wasteful of any thing, least of all of benefits; for, if you eliminate
discernment in giving them, they cease to be benefits, and will fall
under any other name you please.  The sentiment of the second is
admirable, for it allows a solitary benefit that is well placed to
compensate for the loss of many that have been wasted.  But consider,
I beg of you, whether it may not be truer doctrine and more in accord
with the generous spirit of the benefactor to urge him to give even
though not one of his benefits is likely to be well placed.  For "many
must you lose" is a false sentiment; not one is lost, because a loser
is one who had kept an account.  In benefits the book- keeping is
simple - so much is paid out; if anything comes back, it is gain, if
nothing comes back, there is no loss.  I made the gift for the sake of
giving.  No one enters his benefactions in his account-book, or like a
greedy tax-collector calls for payment upon a set day, at a set hour.
The good man never thinks of them unless he is reminded of them by
having them returned; otherwise, they transform themselves into a
loan.  To regard a benefit as an amount advanced is putting it out at
shameful interest.  No matter what the issue of former benefits has
been, still persist in conferring them upon others; this will be
better even if they fall unheeded into the hands of the ungrateful,
for it may be that either shame or opportunity or example will some
day make these grateful. Do not falter, finish your task, and complete
the role of the good man. Help one man with money, another with
credit, another with influence, another with advice, another with
sound precepts.  Even wild beasts are sensible of good offices, and no
creature is so savage that it will not be softened by kindness and
made to love the hand that gives it.  The lion will let a keeper
handle his mouth with impunity, the elephant, for all his fierceness,
is reduced to the docility of a slave by food; so true is it that even
creatures whose condition excludes the comprehension and appraisement
of a benefit, are nevertheless won over by persistent and steadfast
kindness.  Is a man ungrateful for one benefit? Perhaps he will not be
so for a second.  Has he forgotten two benefits? Perhaps a third will
recall to memory the others also that have dropped from his mind.
That man will waste his benefits who is quick to believe that he has
wasted them; but he who presses on, and heaps new benefits upon the
old, draws forth gratitude even from a heart that is hard and
unmindful.  In the presence of multiplied benefits the ingrate will
not dare to lift his eyes; wherever he turns, fleeing his memory of
them, there let him see you - encircle him with your benefits.

Of the nature and property of these I shall speak later if you will
permit me first to digress upon questions that are foreign to the
subject - why the Graces+/a {gratia+} are three in number and why they
are sisters, why they have their hands interlocked, and why they are
smiling and youthful and virginal, and are clad in loose and
transparent garb.  Some would have it appear that there is one for
bestowing a benefit, another for receiving it, and a third for
returning it; others hold that there are three classes of benefactors
- those who earn benefits,/b those who return them, those who receive
and return them at the same time.  But of the two explanations do you
accept as true whichever you like; yet what profit is there in such
knowledge?  Why do the sisters hand in hand dance in a ring which
returns upon itself?  For the reason that a benefit passing in its
course from hand to hand returns nevertheless to the giver; the beauty
of the whole is destroyed if the course is anywhere broken, and it has
most beauty if it is continuous and maintains an uninterrupted
succession.{gift_as_link+} In the dance, nevertheless, an older sister
has especial honour, as do those who earn benefits.  Their faces are
cheerful, as are ordinarily the faces of those who bestow or receive
benefits.  They are young because the memory of benefits ought not to
grow old.  They are maidens because benefits are pure and undefiled
and holy in the eyes of all; and it is fitting that there should be
nothing to bind or restrict them, and so the maidens wear flowing
robes, and these, too, are transparent because benefits desire to be
seen.

There may be someone who follows the Greeks so slavishly as to say
that considerations of this sort are necessary; but surely no one will
believe; also that the names which Hesiod assigned to the Graces have
any bearing upon the subject.  He called the eldest Aglaia, the next
younger Euphrosyne, the third Thalia.  Each one twists the
significance of these names to suit himself, and tries to make them
fit some theory although Hesiod simply bestowed on the maidens the
name that suited his fancy.  And so Homer changed the name of one of
them, calling her Pasithea, and promised her in marriage in order that
it might be dear that, if they were maidens, they were not Vestals./a
I could find another poet in whose writings they are girdled and
appear in robes of thick texture or of Phryxian wool./b And the reason
that Mercury stands with them is, not that argument or eloquence
commends benefits, but simply that the painter chose to picture them
so.
 
Chrysippus, too, whose famous acumen is so keen and pierces to the
very core of truth, who speaks in order to accomplish results, and
uses no more words than are necessary to make himself intelligible -
he fills the whole of his book with these puerilities, insomuch that
he has very little to say about the duty itself of giving, receiving,
and returning a benefit; and his fictions are not grafted upon his
teachings, but his teachings upon his fictions.  For, not to mention
what Hecaton copies from him, Chrysippus says that the three Graces
are daughters of Jupiter and Eurynome, also that, while they are
younger than the Hours, they are somewhat more beautiful, and
therefore have been assigned as companions to Venus.  In his opinion,
too, the name of their mother has some significance, for he says that
she was called Eurynome/a <daughter of Ocean, "wide spreading">
because the distribution of benefits is the mark of an extensive
fortune; just as if a mother usually received her name after her
daughters, or as if the names that poets bestow were genuine!  As a
nomenclator lets audacity supply the place of memory, and every time
that he is unable to call anyone by his true name, he invents one, so
poets do not think that it is of any importance to speak the truth,
but, either forced by necessity or beguiled by beauty.  They impose
upon each person the name that works neatly into the verse.  Nor is it
counted against them if they introduce a new name into the list; for
the next poet orders the maidens to take the name that he devises.
And to prove to you that this is so, observe that Thalia, with whom we
are especially concerned, appears in Hesiod as Charis,/b {charisma+}
in Homer as a Muse.

But for fear that I shall be guilty of the fault that I am
criticizing, I shall abandon all these questions, which are so remote
that they do not even touch the subject.  Only do you defend me if
anyone shall blame me for having put Chrysippus in his place - a great
man, no doubt, but yet a Greek, one whose acumen is so finely pointed
that it gets blunted and often folds back upon itself; even when it
seems to be accomplishing something, it does not pierce, but only
pricks.  But what has acumen to do here?  What we need is a discussion
of benefits and the rules for a practice that constitutes the chief
bond of human society;{Granville+} we need to be given a law of
conduct in order that we may not be inclined to the thoughtless
indulgence that masquerades as generosity, in order, too, that this
very vigilance, while it tempers, may not check our liberality, of
which there ought to be neither any lack nor any excess; we need to be
taught to give willingly, to receive willingly, to return willingly,
and to set before us the high aim of striving, not merely to equal,
but to surpass in deed and spirit those who have placed us under
obligation, for he who has a debt of gratitude to pay never catches up
with the favor unless he outstrips it; the one should be taught to
make no record of the amount, the other to feel indebted for more than
the amount. To this most honourable rivalry in outdoing benefits by
benefits Chrysippus urges us by saying that, in view of the fact that
the Graces are the daughters of Jupiter, we should fear that by
showing a lack of gratitude we might become guilty of sacrilege and do
an injustice to such beautiful maidens! But teach thou me the secret
of becoming more beneficent and more grateful to those who do me a
service, the secret of the rivalry that is born in the hearts of the
obligers and the obliged so that those who have bestowed forget, those
who owe persistently remember.  As for those absurdities, let them be
left to the poets, whose purpose it is to charm the car and to weave a
pleasing tale. But those who wish to heal the human soul, to maintain
faith in the dealings of men, and to engrave upon their minds the
memory of services let these speak with earnestness and plead with all
their power; unless, perchance, you think that by light talk and
fables and old wives' reasonings it is possible to prevent a most
disastrous thing - the abolishment of benefits.

But, just as I am forced to touch lightly upon irrelevant questions,
so I must now explain that the first thing we have to learn is what it
is that we owe when a benefit has been received. For one man says that
he owes the money which he has received, another the consulship,
another the priesthood, another the administration of a province.  But
these things are the marks of services rendered, not the services
themselves.  A benefit cannot possibly be touched by the hand; its
province is the mind.  There is a great difference between the matter
of a benefit and the benefit itself; and so it is neither gold nor
silver nor any of the gifts which are held to be most valuable that
constitutes a benefit, but merely the goodwill+ of him who bestows it.
But the ignorant regard only that which meets the eye, that which
passes from hand to hand and is laid hold of, while they attach little
value to that which is really rare and precious.  The gifts that we
take in our hands, that we gaze upon, that in our covetousness we
cling to, are perishable; for fortune or injustice may take them from
us.  But a benefit endures even after that through which it was
manifested has been lost; for it is a virtuous act, and no power can
undo it.

If I have rescued a friend from pirates, and afterwards a different
enemy seized him and shut him up in prison, he has been robbed, not of
my benefit, but of the enjoyment of my benefit.  If I have saved a
man's children from shipwreck or a fire and restored them to him, and
afterwards they were snatched from him either by sickness or some
injustice of fortune, yet, even when they are no more, the benefit
that was manifested in their persons endures.  All those things,
therefore, which falsely assume the name of benefits, are but the
services through which the goodwill of a friend reveals itself.  The
same thing is true also of other bestowals - the form of the bestowal
is one thing, the bestowal itself another.  The general presents a
soldier with a breast-chain or with a mural and civic crown.  But what
value has the crown in itself?  What the purple-bordered robe?  What
the fasces?  What the tribunal and the chariot? No one of these things
is an honour, they are the badges of honour.  In like manner that
which falls beneath the eye is not a benefit - it is but the trace and
mark of a benefit.

What then is a benefit?  It is the act of a wellwisher who bestows joy
and derives joy from the bestowal of it, and is inclined to do what he
does from the prompting of his own will.  And so what counts is, not
what is done or what is given, but the spirit of the action, because a
benefit consists, not in what is done or given, but in the intention
of the giver or doer.  The great distinction that exists between these
things, moreover, may be grasped from the simple statement that a
benefit is un- doubtedly a good, while what is done or given is
neither a good nor an evil.  It is the intention that exalts small
gifts, gives lustre to those that are mean, and discredits those that
are great and considered of value; the things themselves that men
desire have a neutral nature, which is neither good nor evil/a; all
depends upon the end toward which these are directed by the Ruling
Principle/b {God+} that gives to things their form.  The benefit
itself is not something that is counted out and handed over, just as,
likewise, the honour that is paid to the gods lies, not in the victims
for sacrifice, though they be fat and glitter with gold, but in the
upright and holy desire of the worshippers.  Good men, therefore, are
pleasing to the gods with an offering of meal and gruel; the bad, on
the other hand, do not escape impiety although they dye the altars
with streams of blood.

If benefits consisted, not in the very desire to benefit, but in
things, then the greater the gifts are which we have received, the
greater would be the benefits.  But this is not true; for sometimes we
feel under greater obligations to one who has given small gifts out of
a great heart, who "by his spirit matched the wealth of kings,"/c who
bestowed his little, but gave it gladly, who beholding my poverty
forgot his own, who had, not merely the willingness, but a desire to
help, who counted a benefit given as a benefit received, who gave it
with no thought of having it returned, who, when it was returned, had
no thought of having given it, who not only sought, but seized, the
opportunity of being useful. On the other hand, as I have said before,
those benefits win no thanks, which, though they seem great from their
substance and show, are either forced from the giver or are carelessly
dropped, and that comes much more gratefully which is given by a
willing rather than by a full hand.  The benefit which one man
bestowed upon me is small, but he was not able to give more; that
which another gave me is great, but he hesitated, he put it off, he
grumbled when he gave it, he gave it haughtily, he, published it
abroad, and the person he tried to please was not the one on whom he
bestowed his gift - he made an offering, not to me, but to his pride.

Once when many gifts were being presented to Socrates by his pupils,
each one bringing according to his means, Aeschines, who was poor,
said to him: "Nothing that I am able to give to you do I find worthy
of you, and only in this way do I discover that am a poor man. And so
I give to you the only thing that I possess - myself.  This gift, such
as it is, I beg you to take in good part, and bear in mind that the
others, though they gave to you much, have left more for themselves."
"And how," said Socrates, "could it have been anything but a great
gift - unless maybe you set small value upon yourself?  And so I shall
make it my care to return you to yourself a better man than when I
received you." By this present Aeschines surpassed Alcibiades, whose
heart matched his riches,/a and the wealthy youths with all their
splendid gifts.  You see how even in pinching poverty the heart finds
the means for generosity.  These, it seems to me, were the words of
Aeschines: "You, O Fortune, have accomplished nothing by wishing to
make me poor; I shall none the less find for this great man a gift
that is worthy of him, and, since I cannot give to him from your
store, I shall give from my own." Nor is there any reason for you to
supposethat he counted himself cheap: the value he set upon himself
was himself.  And so clever a young man was he that he discovered a
way of giving to himself -Socrates!  It is not the size of our
respective benefits, but the character of the one from whom they come
that should be our concern.

a/A man is shrewd if he does not make himself difficult of access to
those who come with immoderate desires, and encourages their wild
expectations by his words although in reality he intends to give them
no help; but his reputation suffers if he is sharp of tongue, stern in
countenance, and arouses their jealousy by flaunting his own good
fortune.  For they court, and yet loathe, the prosperous man, and they
hate him for doing the same things that they would do if they could.

They make a laughing-stock of other men's wives, not even secretly,
but openly, and then surrender their own wives to others.  If a man
forbids his wife to appear in public in a sedan-chair and to ride
exposed on every side to the view of observers who everywhere approach
her, he is boorish and unmannerly and guilty of bad form, and the
married women count his demands detestable.  If a man makes himself
conspicuous by not having a mistress, and does not supply an allowance
to another man's wife, the married women say that he is a poor sort
and is addicted to low pleasures and affairs with maidservants.  The
result of this is that adultery has become the most seemly sort of
betrothal, and the bachelor is in accord with the widower, since the
only man who takes a wife is one who takes away a wife.  Now men vie
in squandering what they have stolen and then in regaining by fierce
and sharp greed what they have squandered; they have no scruples; they
esteem lightly the poverty of others and fear poverty for themselves
more than any other evil; they upset peace with their injustices, and
hard press the weaker with violence and fear.  That the provinces are
plundered, that the judgement-seat is for sale, and, when two bids
have been made, is knocked down to one of the bidders is of course not
surprising, since it is the law of nations that you can sell what you
have bought!

But, because the subject is alluring, my ardour has carried me too
far; and so let me close by showing that it is not our generation only
that is beset by this fault.  The complaint our ancestors made, the
complaint we make, the complaint our posterity will make, is that
morality is overturned, that wickedness holds sway, and that human
affairs and every sin are tending toward the worse.  Yet these things
remain and will continue to remain in the same position, with only a
slight movement now in this direction, now in that, like that of the
waves, which a rising tide carries far inland, and a receding tide
restrains within the limits of the shoreline.  Now adultery will be
more common than other sins, and chastity will tear off its reins; now
a furore for feasting and the most shameful scourge that assails
fortunes, the kitchen, will prevail, and now excessive adornment of
the body and the concern for its beauty that displays an unbeauteous
mind; now ill-controlled liberty will burst forth into wantonness and
presumption; and now the progress will be toward cruelty, on the part
both of the state and of the individual, and to the insanity of civil
war, which desecrates all that is holy and sacred; sometimes it will
be drunkenness on which honour is bestowed, and he who can hold the
most wine will be a hero.

Vices do not wait expectantly in just one spot, but are always in
movement and, being at variance with each other, are in constant
turmoil, they rout and in turn are routed; but the verdict we are
obliged to pronounce upon ourselves will always be the same: wicked we
are, wicked we have been, and, I regret to add, always shall be.
Homicides, tyrants, thieves, adulterers, robbers, sacrilegious men,
and traitors there always will be; but worse than all these is the
crime of ingratitude, unless it be that all these spring from
ingratitude, without which hardly any sin has grown to great size.

Do you beware of committing this crime as being the greatest there is;
if another commits it, pardon it as being the most trivial.  For the
sum of your injury is this - you have wasted a benefit.  For you have
the best part of it still unharmed - the fact that you gave it.  But,
although we ought to be careful to confer benefits by preference upon
those who will be likely to respond with gratitude, yet there are some
that we shall do even if we expect from them poor results, and we
shall bestow benefits upon those who, we not only think will be, but
we know have been, ungrateful.  For example, if I shall be able to
restore to someone his sons by rescuing them from great danger without
any risk to myself, I shall not hesitate to do so.  If a man is a
worthy one, I shall defend him even at the cost of my own blood, and
share his peril; if he is unworthy, and I shall be able to rescue him
from robbers by raising an outcry, I shall not be slow to utter the
cry that will save a human being.

I pass next to the discussion of what benefits ought to be given and
the manner of their bestowal.  Let us give what is necessary first,
then what is useful, then what is pleasurable, particularly things
that will endure.  But we should begin with necessities; for that
which supports life impresses the mind in one way, that which adorns
or equips life, in quite another.  It is possible for a man to be
scornful in his estimate of a gift which he can easily do without, of
which he may say: "Take it back, I do not want it; I am content with
what I have." Sometimes it is a pleasure, not merely to give back, but
to hurl from you, what you have received.

Of the benefits that are necessary, some, those without which we are
not able to live, have the first place, others, those without which we
ought not to live, the second, and still others, those without which
we are not willing to live, the third.  The first are of this stamp -
to be snatched from the hands of the enemy, from the wrath of a
tyrant, from proscription, and the other perils which in diverse and
uncertain forms beset human life.  The greater and the more formidable
the danger from any one of these, the greater will be the gratitude
that we shall receive when we have banishes it; for the thought of the
greatness of the ills from which they have been freed will linger in
men's minds, and their earlier fear will enhance the value of our
service.  And yet we ought not to be slower in saving a man than we
might be, solely in order that his fear may add weight to our service.
Next to these come the blessings without which, indeed, we are able to
live, yet death becomes preferable, such as liberty and chastity and a
good conscience.  After these will be the objects that we hold dear by
reason of kinship and blood and experience and long habit, such as
children, wives, household gods, and all the other things to which the
mind becomes so attached that to be robbed of them seems to it more
serious than to be robbed of life.

Next in order are the useful benefits, the matter of which is wide and
varied; here will be money, not in excess, but enough to provide for a
reasonable standard of living; here will be public office and
advancement for those who are striving for the higher positions, for
nothing is more useful than to be made useful to oneself.

All benefits beyond these come as superfluities and tend to pamper a
man.  In the case of these, our aim shall he to make them acceptable
by reason of their timeliness, to keep them from being commonplace,
and to give the sort of things that either few or few in our own time
or in this fashion, have possessed, the sort of things that, even if
they are not intrinsically valuable, may become valuable by reason of
the time and place.  Let us consider what will be likely to give the
greatest pleasure after it has been bestowed, what is likely to meet
the eyes of the owner ov.y case we shall be careful not to send gifts
that are superfluous, for example, the arms of the chase to a woman or
to an old man, books to a bumpkin, or nets/a to one who is devoted to
study and letters.  On, the other hand we shall be equally careful,
while wishing to send what will be acceptable, not to send gifts that
will reproach a man with his weakness, as for example wines to a
drunkard and medicines to a valetudinarian.  For a gift that
recognizes a vice of the recipient tends to be, not a boon, but a
bane.

If the choice of what is to be given is in our own hands, we shall
seek especially for things that will last, in order that our gift may
be as imperishable as possible.  For they are few indeed who are so
grateful that they think of what they have received even if they do
not see it.  Yet even the ungrateful have their memory aroused when
they encounter the gift itself, when it is actually before their eyes
and does not let them forget it, but instead brings up the thought of
its giver and impresses it upon their mind.  And let us all the more
seek to make gifts that will endure because we ought never to remind
anyone of them; let the object itself revive the memory that is
fading.  I shall be more willing to give wrought than coined silver;
more willing to give statues than clothing or something that will wear
out after brief usage.  Few there are whose gratitude survives longer
than the object given; there are more who keep gifts in mind only so
long as they are in use.  For my part, if it is possible, I do not
want my gift to perish; let it survive, let it cling fast to my
friend, let it live with him.

No one is so stupid as to need the warning that he should not send
gladiators or wild beasts to a man who has just given a public
spectacle, or send a present of summer clothing in midwinter and
winter clothing in midsummer.  Common sense should be used in
bestowing a benefit; there must be regard for time, place, and the
person, for some gifts are acceptable or unacceptable according to
circumstances.  How much more welcome the gift will be if we give
something that a man does not have, rather than something with which
he is abundantly supplied, something that he has long searched for and
has not yet found, rather than something which he is likely to see
everywhere! Presents should be, not so much costly, as rare and choice
- the sort which even a rich man will make a place for; just as the
common fruits, of which we shall grow tired after a few days, give us
pleasure if they have ripened out of season.  And, too, people will
not fail to appreciate the gifts which either no one else has given to
them, or which we have given to no one else.

When Alexander of Macedonia, being victorious over the East, was
puffed up with more than human pride, the Corinthians sent their
congratulations by an embassy, and bestowed upon him the right of
citizenship in their state.  This sort of courtesy made Alexander
smile, whereupon one of the ambassadors said to him: "To no one
besides Hercules and yourself have we ever given the right of
citizenship." Alexander gladly accepted so marked an honour, and
bestowed hospitality and other courtesy upon the ambassadors,
reflecting, not who they were who had given him the privilege of
citizenship, but to whom they had given it; and, slave as he was to
glory, {Hotspur+} of which he knew neither the true nature nor the
limitations, following the footsteps of Hercules and of Bacchus, and
not even halting his course where they ceased, he turned his eyes from
the givers of the honour to his partner in it, just as if heaven, to
which in supreme vanity he aspired, were now his because he was put on
a level with Hercules!  Yet what resemblance to him had that mad youth
who instead of virtue showed fortunate/a {Plutarch's_Fortune+}
rashness?  Hercules conquered nothing for himself; he traversed the
world, not in coveting, but in deciding what to conquer, a foe of the
wicked, a defender of the good, a peacemaker on land and sea.  But
this other was from his boyhood a robber and a plunderer of nations, a
scourge alike to his friends and to his foes, one who found his
highest happiness in terrorizing all mortals, forgetting that it is
not merely the fiercest creatures, but also the most cowardly, that
are feared on account of their deadly venom. {Iago+}

But let me return now to my subject.  Whoever gives a benefit to
anyone you please, gives acceptably to no one; in an inn or a hotel no
one regards himself as the guest of the landlord, or at a public feast
as the intimate friend of the man who is giving it, for one may well
say: "What favor, pray, has he conferred upon me?  The same, to be
sure, that he has conferred onhat other fellow, whom he scarcely
knows, and on that one over there, who is his enemy and a most
disreputable man.  Did he consider that I was worthy of it?  He merely
indulged a personal weakness/b!" If you want to give what will be
acceptable, make the gift a rare one - anyone can endure being
indebted for that!  Let no one gather from my words that I desire to
restrain liberality, to bridle it in with tighter reins; let it indeed
go forth as far as it likes, but let it go by a path, and not wander.
It is possible to distribute bounty in such a way that each person,
even if he has received his gift in company with others, will think
that he is simply one of a crowd.  Let everyone have some mark of
intimacy which permits him to hope that he has been admitted to
greater favor than others.  He may say: "I received the same thing
that So-and-so did, but without asking for it.  I received the same
thing that So-and-so did, but at the end of a short time, whereas he
had long since earned it. There are those who have the same thing, but
it was not given to them with the same words, with the same,
friendliness, on the part of the bestower. So-and-so received his gift
after he had asked for it; I did not ask for mine.  So-and-so received
a gift, but he could easily make return, but his old age and his
irresponsible childlessness/a afforded great expectation, to me more
was given although the same thing was given, because it was given
without expectation of any return." A courtesan will distribute her
favours among her many lovers in such a way that each one of them will
get some sign of her intimate regard; just so the man who wishes his
benefactions to be appreciated should contrive both to place many
under obligation, and yet to see that each one of them gets something
that will make him think he is preferred above all the others.

In truth, I place no obstacles in the way of benefits; the more there
are and the greater they are, the more honour will they have.  But let
judgement be used; for what is given in a haphazard and thoughtless
manner will be prized by no one.  Wherefore, if anyone supposes that
in laying down these rules we mean to narrow the bounds of liberality,
and to open to it a less extensive field, he really has heard my
admonitions incorrectly.  For what virtue do we Stoics venerate more?
What virtue do we try more to encourage?  Who are so fitted to give
such admonition as ourselves - we who would establish the fellowship
of the whole human race?  What, then, is the case?  Since no effort of
the mind is praiseworthy even if it springs from right desire, unless
moderation turns it into some virtue, I protest against the
squandering of liberality.  The benefit that it is a delight to have
received, yea, with outstretched hands, is the one that reason
delivers to those who are worthy, not the one that chance and
irrational impulse carry no matter where - one that it is a pleasure
to display and to claim as one's own. Do you give the name of benefits
to the gifts whose author you are ashamed to admit?  But how much more
acceptable are benefits, how much deeper do they sink into the mind,
never to leave it, when the pleasure of them comes from thinking, not
so much of what has been received, as of him from whom it was
received!

Crispus Passienus used often to say that from some men he would rather
have their esteem than their bounty, and that from others he would
rather have their bounty than their esteem; and he would add examples.
"In the case of the deified Augustus," he would say, "I prefer his
esteem, in the case of Claudius, his bounty." I, for my part, think
that we should never seek a benefit from a man whose esteem is not
valued.  What, then, is the case?  Should not the gift that was
offered by Claudius have been accepted?  It should, but as it would
have been accepted from Fortune, who you were well aware might the
next moment become unkind. And why do we differentiate the two cases
that thus have merged?  A gift is not a benefit if the best part of it
is lacking - the fact that it was given as a mark of esteem.  Moreover
the gift of a huge sum of money, if neither reason nor rightness of
choice has prompted it, is no more a benefit than is a treasure trove.
There are many gifts that ought to be accepted, and yet impose no
obligation.

BOOK II

Now let us examine, most excellent Liberalis, what still remains from
the first part of the subject - the question of the way in which a
benefit should be given.  And in this matter I think that I can point
out a very easy course - let us give in the manner that would have
been acceptable if we were receiving.  Above all let us give
willingly, promptly, and without hesitation.  No gratitude is felt for
a, benefit when it has lingered long {haero_stick+} in the hands of
him who gives it, or when the giver has seemed sorry to let it go, and
has given it with the air of one who was robbing himself.  Even though
some delay should intervene, let us avoid in every way the appearance
of having deliberately delayed; hesitation is the next thing to
refusing, and gains no gratitude.  For, since in the case of a benefit
the chief pleasure of it comes from the intention of the bestower, he
who by his very hesitation has shown that he made his bestowal
unwillingly has not "given," but has failed to withstand the effort to
extract it; there are many indeed who become generous only from a lack
of courage.  The benefits that stir most gratitude are those which are
readily and easily obtainable and rush to our hands, where, if there
is any delay, it has come only from the delicacy of the recipient.
The best course is to anticipate each one's desire; the next best, to
indulge it.  The first is the better - to forestall the request before
it is put; for, since a respectable man seals his lips and is covered
with blushes if he has to beg, he who spares him this torture
multiplies the value of his gift.  The man who receives a benefit
because he asked for it, does not get it for nothing, since in truth,
as our forefathers, those most venerable men, discerned, no other
thing costs so dear as the one that entreaty buys.  If men had to make
their vows to the gods openly, they would be more sparing of them; so
true is it that even to the gods, to whom we most rightly make
supplication, we would rather pray in silence and in the secrecy of
our hearts. xxxIt is unpleasant and burdensome to have to say, "I
ask," and as a man utters the words he is forced to lower his
eyes. {Bassanio+} A friend and every one whom you hope to make a
friend by doing him a service must be excused from saying them; though
a man gives promptly, his benefit has been given too late if it has
been given upon request.  Therefore we ought to divine each man's
desire, and, when we have discovered it, he ought to be freed from the
grievous necessity of making a request; the benefit that takes the
initiative, you may be sure, will be one that is agreeable and
destined to live in the heart.  If we are not so fortunate as to
anticipate the asker, let us cut him off from using many words;
{Antonio+} in order that we may appear to have been, not asked, but
merely informed, let us promise at once and prove by our very haste
that we were about to act even before we were solicited.  Just as in
the case of the sick suitability of food aids recovery, and plain
water given at the right time serves as a remedy, so a benefit, no
matter how trivial and commonplace it may be, if it has been, given
promptly, if not an hour has been wasted, gains much in value and wins
more gratitude than a gift that, though costly, has been laggard and
long considered.  One who acts thus readily leaves no doubt that he
acts willingly; and so he acts gladly, and his face is clothed with
the joy he feels.

Some who bestow immense benefits spoil them by their silence or
reluctant words, which give the impression of austerity and sternness,
and, though they promise a gift, have the air of refusing it.  How
much better to add kindly words to kindly actions, and grace the gifts
you bestow with humane and generous speech!  In order that the
recipient may reproach himself because he was slow to ask, you might
add the familiar rebuke I am angry with you because, when you needed
something, you were not willing to let me know long ago, because you
took so much pains in putting your request, because you invited a
witness to the transaction. Truly I congratulate myself because you
were moved to put my friendliness to the test; next time you will
demand by your own right whatever need - this once I pardon your
bashfulness.  The result of this will be that he will value your
friendliness more than your gift, no matter what it was that he had
come to seek.  The bestower attains the highest degree of merit, the
highest degree of generosity, only when it will be possible for the
man who has left him to say: "Great is the gain that I have made
today; but I would rather have found the giver to be the sort of man
he was than to have had many times the amount that we were talking
about come to me in some other way; for the spirit he has shown I can
never return enough gratitude.

Yet there are very many who by the harshness of their words and by
their arrogance make their benefits hateful, so that, after being
subjected to such language and such disdain, we regret that we have
obtained them.  And then, after the matter has been promised, a series
of delays ensues; but nothing is more painful than when you have to
beg even for what you have been promised.  Benefits should be bestowed
on the spot, but there are some from whom it is more difficult to get
them than to get the promise of them.  You have to beg one man to act
as a reminder, another to finish the transaction; so a single gift is
worn down by passing through many men s hands, and as a result very
little gratitude is left for the giver of the promise, for every later
person whose help must be asked reduces the sum due to him.  And so,
if you wish the benefactions that you bestow to be rewarded with
gratitude, you will be concerned to have them come undiminished to
those to whom they were promised, to have them come entire and, as the
saying is, "without deduction." Let no one intercept them, let no one
retard them; for in the case of a benefit that you are going to give,
no one can appropriate gratitude to himself without reducing what is
due to you.

Nothing is so bitter as long suspense; some can endure more calmly to
have their expectation cut off than deferred. Yet very many are led
into this fault of postponing promised benefits by a perverted
ambition to keep the crowd of their petitioners from becoming smaller;
such are the tools of royal power, who delight in prolonging a display
of arrogance, and deem themselves to be robbed of power unless they
show long and often, to one after another, how, much power they have.
They do nothing promptly, nothing once for all; their injuries are
swift, their benefits slow.  And therefore the words of the comic
poet, you are to believe, are absolutely true, Know you not this - the
more delay you make,

The less of gratitude from me you take?/a And so a man cries out in an
outburst of noble anger: "If you are going to do anything, do it;"
and: "Nothing is worth such a price; I would rather have you say no at
once." When the mind has been, reduced to a state of weariness, and,
while waiting for a benefit, begins loathe it, can one possibly feel
grateful for it?  Just as the sharpest cruelty is that which prolongs
punishment, and there is a sort of mercy in killing swiftly because
the supreme torture brings with it its own end, whereas the worst part
of the execution that is sure to come is the interval that precedes
it, so, in the case of a gift, gratitude for it will be the greater,
the less long it has hung in the balance.  For it is disquieting to
have to wait even for blessings, and, since most benefits afford
relief from some trouble, if a man leaves another to long torture when
he might release him at once, or to tardy rejoicing, he has done
violence to the benefit he confers. All generosity moves swiftly. and
he who acts willingly is prone to act quickly; if a man gives help
tardily, deferring it from day to day, he has not given it heartily.
Thus he has lost two valuable things - time and the proof of his
friendly intent; tardy goodwill smacks of ill-will.

In every transaction, Liberalis, not the least important part is the
manner in which things are either said or done.  Much is gained by
swiftness, much is lost by delay.  Just as, in the case of javelins,
while all may have the same weight of iron, it makes an infinite
difference whether they are hurled with a swing of the arm, or slip
from a slackened hand, and just as the same sword will both scratch
and deeply wound - the tightness of the grasp which directs it makes
the difference - so, while the thing that is given may be just the
same, the manner of the giving is all important.  How sweet, how
precious is a gift, for which the giver will not suffer us to pay even
our thanks, which he forgot that he had given even while he was giving
it!  For to reprimand a man at the very moment that you are bestowing
something upon him is madness, it is grafting insult upon an act of
kindness.  Benefits, therefore, must not be made irritating, they must
not be accompanied by anything that is unpleasant, even if there
should be something upon which you would like to offer advice, choose
a different time.

Fabius Verrucosus used to say that a benefit rudely given by a
hard-hearted man is like a loaf of gritty bread, which a starving man
needs must accept, but which is bitter to eat.

When Marius Nepos, a praetorian, being in debt, asked Tiberius Caesar
to come to his rescue, Tiberius ordered him to supply him with the
names of his creditors; but this is really, not making a gift, but
assembling creditors.  When the names had been supplied, he wrote to
Nepos that he had ordered the money to be paid, adding at the same
time some offensive admonition.  The result was that Nepos had neither
a debt nor, a true benefit; Tiberius freed him from his creditors, but
failed to attach him to himself.  Yet Tiberius had his purpose; he
wished to prevent others, I suppose, from rushing to him in order to
make the same request.  That, perhaps, may have been an effective way
to check, through a sense of shame, the extravagant desires of men,
but a wholly different method must be followed by one who is giving a
benefit.  In order that what you give may become the more acceptable,
you should enhance its value by every. possible means.  Tiberius was
really not giving a benefit - he was finding fault.  And - to say in
passing what I think about this other point - it is not quite proper
even for a prince to bestow a gift in order to humiliate.  "Yet," it
may be said, "Tiberius was not able even in this way to escape what he
was trying to avoid; for after this a goodly number were found to make
the same request, and he ordered them all to explain to the senate why
they were in debt, and under this condition he granted to them
specific sums." But liberality that is not, it is censorship; I get
succour, I get a subsidy from the prince - that is no benefit which I
am not able to think of without a blush.  It was a judge before whom I
was summoned; I had to plead a case in order to obtain my request.
And so all moralists are united upon the principle that it is
necessary to give certain benefits openly, others without witnesses -
openly, those that it is glorious to obtain, such as military
decorations or official honours and any other distinction that becomes
more attractive by reason of publicity; on the other hand, those that
do not give promotion or prestige, yet come to the rescue of bodily
infirmity, of poverty, of disgrace - these should be given quietly, so
that they will be known only to those who receive the benefit.

Sometimes, too, the very man who is helped must even be deceived in
order that he may have assistance, and yet not know from whom he has
received it.  There is a story that Arcesilaus had a friend who,
though he was poor, concealed his poverty; when, however, the man fell
ill and, being unwilling to reveal even this, lacked money for the
necessities of life, Arcesilaus decided that he must assist him in
secret; and so, without the other's knowledge, he slipped a purse
under his pillow in order that the fellow who was so uselessly
reserved might find, rather than receive, what he needed.  "What,
then? - shall a man not know from whom he has received?" In the first
place, he must not know, if an element of the benefit is just that
fact; then, again, I shall do much else for him I shall bestow upon
him many gifts, and from these he may guess the author of the first
one; lastly, while he will not know that he has received a gift, I
shall know that I have given one.  "That is not enough," you say.
That is not enough if you are thinking of making an investment; but if
a gift, you will give in the manner that will bring most advantage to
the recipient.  You will be content to have yourself your witness;
otherwise your pleasure comes, not from doing a favour, but from being
seen to do a favour.  "I want the man at least to know!" Then it is a
debtor that you are looking for.  " I want the man at least to know!"
What? if it is more to his advantage, more to his honour, more to his
pleasure not to know, will you not shift your position?  "I want him
to know!" So, then, you will not save a man's life in the dark?  I do
not deny that, whenever circumstances permit, we should have regard
for the pleasure we get from the willingness of the recipient; but, if
he needs, and yet is ashamed, to be helped, if what we bestow gives
offence unless it is concealed - then I do not put my good deed into
the gazette/a!  Of course I am careful not to reveal to him that the
gift came from me, since it is a first and indispensable requirement,
never to reproach a man with a benefit, nay, even to remind him of it.
For, in the case of a benefit, this is a binding rule for the two who
are concerned - the one should straightway forget that it was given,
the other should never forget that it was received.

Repeated reference to our services wounds and crushes the spirit of
 the other.  He wants to cry out like the man who, after being saved
 from the proscription of the triumvirs by one of Caesar's friends,
 because he could not endure his benefactor's arrogance, cried "Give
 me back to Caesar!" How long will you keep repeating: "It is I who
 saved you, it is I who snatched you from death"?  Your service, if I
 remember it of my own will, is truly life; if I remember it at yours,
 it is death. I owe nothing to you if you saved me in order that you
 might have someone to exhibit.  How long will you parade me?  How
 long will you refuse to let me forget my misfortune?  In a triumph, I
 should have had to march but once! No mention should be made of what
 we have bestowed; to remind a man of it is to ask him to return it.
 It must not be dwelt upon, it must not be recalled to memory - the
 only way to remind a man of an carlier gift is to give him another.
 And we must not tell others of it, either.  Let the giver of a
 benefit hold his tongue; let the recipient talk.  For the same thing
 that was said to another man when he was boasting of a benefit he had
 conferred will be said to you.  "You will not deny," said the
 beneficiary, "that you have had full return." "When?" inquired the
 other.  "Many times," was the reply, "and in many places -that is,
 every time and in every where that you have told of it!" But what
 need is there to speak of a benefit, what need to preempt the right
 that belongs to another?  There is someone else who can do more
 creditably what you are doing, someone who in telling of your deed
 will laud even your part in not telling of it.  You must adjudge me
 ungrateful if you suppose that no one will know of your deed if you
 yourself are silent!  But so far from its being permissible for us to
 speak of it, even if anyone tells of our benefits in our presence, it
 is our duty to reply: "While this man is in the highest degree worthy
 to receive even greater benefits, yet I am more conscious of being
 willing to bestow all possible benefits upon him than of having
 actually bestowed them hitherto." And in saying even this there must
 be no show of currying favour, nor of that air with which some reject
 the compliments that they would rather appropriate.  Besides, we must
 add to generosity every possible kindness. The farmer will lose all
 that he has sown if he ends his labours with putting in the seed; it
 is only after much care that crops are brought to their yield;
 nothing that is not encouraged by constant cultivation from the first
 day to the last ever reaches the stage of fruit.  In the case of
 benefits the same rule holds.  Can there possibly be any greater
 benefits than those that a father bestows upon his children?  Yet
 they are all in vain if they are discontinued in the child's infancy
 - unless longlasting devotion nurses its first gift.  And the same
 rule holds for all other benefits - you will lose them unless you
 assist them; it is not enough that they were given, they must be
 tended.  If you wish to have gratitude from those whom you lay under
 an obligation, you must, not merely give, but love, your benefits.
 Above all, as I have said, let us spare the ears; a reminder stirs
 annoyance, a reproach hatred.  In giving a benefit nothing ought to
 be avoided so much as haughtiness.  Why need your face show disdain,
 your words assumption?  The act itself exalts you.  Empty boasting
 must be banished; our deeds will speak even if we are silent.  The
 benefit that is haughtily bestowed wins, not only ingratitude, but
 ill-will.

Gaius Caesar granted life to Pompeius Pennus, that is, if failure to
take it away is granting it; then, when Pompeius after his acquittal
was expressing his thanks, Caesar extended his left foot to be kissed.
Those who excuse the action, and say that it was not meant to be
insolent, declare that he wanted to display his gilded, - no, his
golden - slipper studded with pearls./a Yes, precisely - what insult
to the consular if he kissed gold and pearls, since otherwise he could
have found no spot on Caesar's person that would be less defiling to
kiss? But this creature, born for the express purpose of changing the
manners of a free state into a servitude like Persia's, thought it was
not enough if a senator, an old man, a man who had held the highest
public offices, bent the knee and prostrated himself before brim in
full sight of the nobles, just as the conquered prostrate themselves
before their conquerors; he found a way of thrusting Liberty down even
lower than the knees!  Is not this a trampling upon the commonwealth,
and too although the detail may not seem to some of any importance -
with the left foot?  For he would have made too little display of
shameful and crazy insolence in wearing slippers a when he was trying
a consular for his life unless he had thrust his imperial hobnails/b
in the face of a senator!

O Pride, the bane of great fortune and its highest folly!  How glad we
are to receive nothing from thee!  How thou dost turn every sort of
benefit into an injury!  How will all thy acts become thee!  The
higher thou hast lifted thyself, the lower thou dost sink, and provest
that thou hast no right to lay claim to those blessings that cause
thee to be so greatly puffed up; thou dost spoil all that thou
givest. And so I like to ask her why she is so fond of swelling out
her chest, of marring her expression and the appearance of her face to
the extent of actually preferring to wear a mask instead of human
visage.  The gifts that please are those that are bestowed by one who
wears the countenance of a human being, all gentle and kindly, by one
who, though he was my superior when he gave them, did not exalt
himself above me, but, with all the generosity in his power, descended
to my own level, and banished all display from his giving, who thus
watched for the suitable moment for the purpose of coming to my rescue
with timely, rather than with necessary, aid.  The only way in which
we shall ever convince these arrogant creatures that they are ruining
their benefits by their insolence is to show them that benefits do not
appear more important simply because they were given with much noise;
and, too, that they themselves do not appear more important in
anyone's eyes because of that; that the importance of pride is an
illusion, and tends to cause hatred for actions that ought to be
loved.

There are certain gifts that are likely to harm those who obtain them,
and, in the case of these, the benefit consists, not in giving, but in
withholding, them; we shall therefore consider the advantage rather
than the desire of the petitioner.  For we often crave things that are
harmful, and we are not able to discern how destructive they are
because our judgement is hampered by passion; but, when the desire has
subsided, when that frenzied impulse, which puts prudence to rout, has
passed, we loathe the givers of the evil gifts for the destruction
they have wrought.  As we withhold cold water from the sick, and the
sword from those who are stricken with grief and the rage of self-
destruction, as we withhold from the insane everything that they could
use against themselves in a fit of frenzy, so, in general, to those
who petition for gifts that will be harmful we shall persistently
refuse them although they make earnest and humble, sometimes even
piteous, request.  It is right to keep in view, not merely the first
effects, but the outcome, of our benefits, and to give those that it
is a pleasure, not merely to receive, but to have received. For there
are many who say, "I know that this will not be to his advantage, but
what can I do?  He begs for it, and I cannot resist his entreaties. It
is his own look- out - he will blame himself, not me." No, you are
wrong - you are the one he will blame, and rightly so.  When he comes
to his right mind, when the frenzy that inflamed his soul has
subsided, how can he help hating the one who helped to put him in the
way of harm and danger?  It is cruel kindness to yield to requests
that work the destruction of those who make them.  Just as it is a
very noble act to save the life of a man, even against his will and
desire, so to lavish upon him what is harmful, even though he begs for
it, is but hatred cloaked by courtesy and civility.  Let the benefit
that we give be one that will become more and more satisfying by use,
one that will never change into an evil.  I will not give a man money
if I know that it will be handed over to an adulteress, nor will I
allow myself to become a partner in dishonour, actual or planned; if I
can, I will restrain crime, if not, I will not aid it.  Whether a man
is being driven by anger in a direction that he ought not to take, or
is being turned from the safe course by a burning ambition, I shall
not permit him to draw from me myself the power to work any harm, nor
allow it to be possible for him to act at any future time: "That man
has ruined me by his love." Often there is no difference between the
favours of our friends and the prayers of our enemies; into the ills
that the latter desire may befall us, the former by their inopportune
kindness drive us, and provide the means.  Yet, often as it happens,
what can be more disgraceful than that there should be no difference
between benificence and hatred?  Let us never bestow benefits that can
redound to our shame.  Since the sum total of friendship consists in
putting a friend on an equality with ourselves, consideration must be
given at the same time to the interests of both. I shall give to him
if he is in need, yet not to the extent of bringing need upon myself;
I shall come to his aid if he is at the point of ruin, yet not to the
extent of bringing ruin upon my self, unless by so doing I shall
purchase the safety of a great man or a great cause.  I shall never
give a benefit which I should be ashamed to ask for.  I shall neither
magnify the value of a small service, nor allow a great service to
pass as a small one; for, just as he who takes credit for what he
gives destroys all feeling of gratitude, so he who makes clear the
value of what he gives recommends his gift, does not make it a
reproach.  Each one of us should consider his own means and resources
in order that we may not bestow either a larger or a smaller amount
than we are able to give.  We should take into account, too, the
character of the person to whom we are giving; for some gifts are too
small to come fittingly from the hands of a great man, and some are
too. large for the other to take.  Do you therefore compare the
characters of the two concerned, and over against these weigh the gift
itself in order to determine whether, in the case of the giver, it
will be either too onerous or too small, and whether, on the other
hand, the one who is going to receive it will either disdain it or
find it too large.  Alexander - madman that he was, and incapable of
conceiving any plan that was not grandiose - once presented somebody
with a whole city.  When the man to whom he was presenting it had
taken his own measure, and shrank from incurring the jealousy that so
great a gift would arouse, Alexander's reply was: "I am concerned, not
in what is becoming for you to receive, but in what is becoming for me
to give." This seems a spirited and regal speech, but in reality it is
most stupid.  No, nothing, in itself, makes a becoming gift for any
man; it all depends upon who gives it and who receives it - the when,
wherefore, and where of the gift, and all the other items without
which there can be no true reckoning of the value of the deed.  You
puffed-up creature! If it is not becoming fox the man to accept the
gift, neither is it becoming for you to give it; the relation of the
two in point of character and rank is taken into account, and, since
virtue is everywhere a mean,/a excess and defect are equally an error.
Granted that you have such power, and that Fortune has lifted you to
such a height that you can fling whole cities as largesses (but how
much more magnanimous it would have been not to take, than to
squander, them!), yet it is possible that there is someone who is too
small to put a whole city in his pocket!

A certain Cynic once asked Antigonus for a talent his reply was that
this was more than a Cynic had a right to ask for.  After this rebuff
the cynic asked for a denarius; here the reply was that this was less
than a king could becomingly give.  "Such sophistry," it may be said,
"is most unseemly; the king found a way of not giving either. In the
matter of the denarius he thought only of the king, in the matter of
the talent only of the Cynic, although he might well have given the
denarius on the score that the man was a Cynic, or the talent on the
score that he himself was a king.  Grant that there may be some gift
that is too large for a Cynic to receive, none is too small for a king
to bestow with honour if it is given out of kindness." If you ask my
opinion, I think the king was right; for the situation is intolerable
that a man should ask for money when he despises it.  Your Cynic has a
declared hatred of money; he has published this sentiment, he has
chosen this role - now he must play it.  It is most unfair for him to
obtain money while he boasts of poverty.  It is, then, every man's
duty to consider not less his own character than the character of the
man to whom he is planning to give assistance.

I wish to make use of an illustration that our Chrysippus once drew
from the playing of ball.  If the ball falls to the ground, it is
undoubtedly the fault either of the thrower or the catcher; it
maintains its course only so long as it does not escape from the hands
of the two players by reason of their skill in catching and throwing
it. The good player, however, must of necessity use one method of
hurling the ball to a partner who is a long way off, and another to
one who is near at hand.  The same condition applies to a benefit.
Unless this is suited to the character of both, the one who gives and
the one who receives, it will neither leave the hands of the one, nor
reach the hands of the other in the proper manner.  If we are playing
with a practised and skilled partner, we shall be bolder in throwing
the ball, for no matter how it comes his ready and quick hand will
promptly drive it back; if with an unskilled novice, we shall not
throw it with so much tension and so much violence, but play more
gently, and run slowly forward guiding the ball into his very hand.
The same course must be followed in the case of benefits; some men
need to be taught, and we should show that we are satisfied if they
try, if they dare, if they are willing.  But we ourselves are most
often the cause of ingratitude in others, and we encourage them, to be
ungrateful, just as if our benefits could be great only when it was
impossible to return gratitude for them!  It is as if some spiteful
player should purposely try to discomfit his fellow-player, to the
detriment of the game, of course, which can be carried on only in a
spirit of cooperation. {Gift_spirit+} There are many, too, who are
naturally so perverse that they would rather lose what they have
bestowed than appear to have had any return - arrogant, purse-proud
men.  But how much better, how much more kindly would it be to aim at
having the recipients also do regularly their part, to encourage a
belief in the possibility of repaying with gratitude, to put a kindly
interpretation upon all that they do, to listen to words of thanks as
if they were an actual return, to show oneself complaisant to the
extent of wishing that the one upon whom the obligation was laid
should also be freed from it.  A money-lender usually gets a bad name
if he is harsh in his demands, likewise too, if he is reluctant to
accept payment, and obstinately seeks to defer it.  But in the ease of
a benefit it is as right to accept a return as it is wrong to demand
it. The best man is he who gives readily, never demands any return,
rejoices if a return is made, who in all sincerity forgets what he has
bestowed, and accepts a return in the spirit of one accepting a
benefit.  Some men are arrogant, not only in giving, but even in
receiving, benefits, a mistake which is never excusable.  For let me
now pass to the other side of the subject in order to consider how men
ought to conduct themselves in accepting a benefit.  Every obligation
that involves two people makes an equal demand upon both.  When you
have considered the sort of person a father ought to be, you will find
that there remains the not less great task of discovering the sort
that a son should be; it is true that a husband has certain duties,
yet those of the wife are not less great.  In the exchange of
obligations each in turn renders to the other the service that he
requires, and they desire that the same rule of action should apply to
both, but this rule, as Hecaton says, is a difficult matter; for it is
always hard to attain to Virtue, even to approach Virtue; for there
must be, not merely achievement, but achievement through reason.
Along the whole path of life Reason+ must be our guide, all our acts,
from the smallest to the greatest, must follow her counsel; as she
prompts, so also must we give.

Now her first precept will be that it is not necessary for us to
receive from everybody.  From whom, then, shall we receive? To answer
you briefly, from those to whom we could have given.  Let us see, in
fact, whether it does not require even greater discernment to find a
man to whom we ought to owe, than one on whom we ought to bestow, a
benefit. For, even though there should be no unfortunate consequences
(and there are very many of them), yet it is grievous torture to he
under obligation to someone whom you object to; on the other hand, it
is a very great pleasure to have received a benefit from one whom you
could love even after an injury, when his action has shown a
friendship that was in any case agreeable to be also justified.
Surely, an unassuming and honest man will be in a most unhappy plight
if it becomes his duty to love someone when it gives him no pleasure.
But I must remind you, again and again, that I am not speaking of the
ideal wise man to whom every duty is also a pleasure, who rules over
his own spirit, and imposes upon himself any law that he pleases, and
always observes any that he has imposed, but of the man who with all
his imperfections desires to follow the perfect path, yet has passions
that often are reluctant to obey.  And so it is necessary for me to
choose the person from whom I wish to receive a benefit; and, in
truth, I must be far more careful in selecting my creditor for a
benefit than a creditor for a loan.  For to the latter I shall have to
return the same amount that I have received, and, when I have returned
it, I have paid all my debt and am free; but to the other I must make
an additional payment, and, even after I have paid my debt of
gratitude, the bond between us still holds; for, just when I have
finished paying it, I am obliged to begin again, and friendship
endures/a; and, as I would not admit an unworthy man to my friendship,
so neither would I admit one who is unworthy to the most sacred
privilege of benefits, from which friendship springs.  "But," you
reply, "I am not always permitted to say, 'I refuse'; sometimes I must
accept a benefit even against my wish.  If the giver is a cruel and
hot-tempered tyrant, who will deem the spurning of his gift an
affront, shall I not accept it?  Imagine in a like situation a brigand
or a pirate or a king with the temper of a brigand or a pirate.  What
shall I do?  Is such a man altogether unworthy of my being indebted to
him?" When I say that you must choose the person to whom you would
become indebted, I except the contingency of superior force or of
fear, for, when these are applied, all choice is destroyed.  But, if
you are free, if it is for you to decide whether you are willing or
not, you will weigh the matter thoroughly in your mind; if necessity
removes any possibility of choice, you will realize that it is for
you, not to accept, but to obey.  No man contracts an obligation by
accepting something that he had no power to reject; if you wish to
discover whether I am willing, make it possible for me to be
unwilling. "Yet suppose it was life that he gave you!" It makes no
difference what the gift is if it is not given willingly to one who
accepts willingly; though you have saved my life, you are not for that
reason my saviour. Poison at times serves as a remedy, but it is not
for that reason counted as a wholesome medicine.  Some things are
beneficial, and yet impose no obligation.  A man, who had approached a
tyrant for the purpose of killing him, lanced a tumour for him by the
blow of his sword; he did not, however, for that reason receive the
thanks of the tyrant, though by doing him injury he cured him of the
disorder to which the surgeons had not had the courage to apply the
knife.

You see that the act itself is of no great consequence, since it
appears that the man who from evil intent actually renders a service
has not given a benefit; for chance designs the benefit, the man
designs injury.  We have seen in the amphitheatre a lion, who, having
recognized one of the beast- fighters as the man who had formerly been
his keeper, protected him from the attack of the other beasts.  Is,
then, the assistance of the wild beast to be counted a benefit?  By no
means, for it neither willed to do one, nor actually did one with the
purpose of doing it.  In the same category, in which I have placed the
wild beast, do you place your tyrant - the one as well as the other
has given life, neither the one or the other a benefit.  For, since
that which I am forced to receive is not a benefit, that also which
puts me under obligation to someone against my will is not a benefit.
You ought to give me first the right to choose for myself, then the
benefit.

It is an oft-debated question whether Marcus Brutus ought to have
received his life from the hands of the deified Julius when in his
opinion it was his duty to kill him.  The reason that led him to kill
Caesar I shall discuss elsewhere, for, although in other respects he
was a great man in this particular he seems to me to have acted very
wrongly, and to have failed to conduct himself in accordance with
Stoic teaching. Either he was frightened by the name of king, though a
state reaches its best condition under the rule of a just king, or he
still hoped that liberty could exist where the rewards both of supreme
power and of servitude were so great, or that the earlier constitution
of the state could be restored after the ancient manners had all been
lost, that equality of civil rights might still exist and laws
maintain their rightful place there where he had seen so many
thousands of men fighting to decided, not whether, but to which of the
two masters, they would be slaves!  How forgetful, in truth, he was,
either of the law of nature or of the history of his own city, in
supposing that, after one man had been murdered, no other would be
found who would have the same aims - although a Tarquin had been
discovered after so many of the kings had been slain by the sword or
lightning!  But Brutus ought to have received his life, yet without
regarding Caesar in the light of a father, for the good reason that
Caesar had gained the right to give a benefit by doing violence to
right; for he who has not killed has not given life, and has given,
not a benefit, but quarter.

A question that offers more opportunity for debate is what should be
the course of a captive if the price of his ransom is offered to him
by a man who prostitutes his body and dishonours his mouth.  Shall I
permit a filthy wretch to save me?  Then, if I have been saved, how
shall I return my gratitude?  Shall I live with a lewd fellow?  Shall
I not live with my deliverer?  I shall tell you what in that case
would be my course.  Even from such a man I shall receive the money
that will buy my freedom.  I shall, however, receive it, not as a
benefit, but as a loan; then I shall repay the money to him, and, if I
ever have an opportunity to save him from a perilous situation, I
shall save him as for friendship, which is a bond between equals, I
shall not condescend to that, and I shall regard him, not as a
preserver, but as a banker, to whom I am well aware that I must return
the amount that I have received.

It is possible that, while a man may be a worthy person for me to
receive a benefit from, it will injure him to give it; this I shall
not accept for the very reason that he is ready to do me a service
with inconvenience, or even with risk, to himself.  Suppose that he is
willing to defend me in a trial, but by his defence of me will make an
enemy of the king; I am his enemy if, since he is willing to run a
risk for my sake, I do not do the easier thing - run my risk without
him.

A foolish and silly example of this is a case that Hecaton cites.
     Arcesilaus, he says, refused to accept a sum of money that was
     offered to him by a man who was not yet his own master a for fear
     that the giver might offend his miserly father.  But what was
     praiseworthy in his act of refusing to come into possession of
     stolen property, of preferring not to receive it than to restore
     it?  For what self-restraint is there in refusing to accept the
     gift of another man's property?  If there is need of an example
     of a noble spirit, let us take the case of Julius Graccinus' a
     rare soul, whom Gaius Caesar killed simply because he was a
     better man than a tyrant found it profitable for anyone to be.
     This man, when he was receiving contributions from his friends to
     meet the expense of the public games, refused to accept a large
     sum of money that Fabius Persicus had sent; and, when those who
     were thinking, not of the senders, but of what was sent,
     reproached him because he had rejected the contribution, he
     replied: "Am I to accept a benefit from a man from whom I would
     not accept a toast to my health?" And, when a consular named
     Rebilus, a man of an equally bad reputation, had sent an even
     larger sum and insisted that he should order it to be accepted,
     he replied: "I beg your pardon; but I have already refused to
     accept money from Persicus." Is this accepting a present or is it
     picking a senate?

When we have decided that we ought to accept, let us accept
cheerfully, professing our pleasure and letting the giver have proof
of it in order that he may reap instant reward; for, as it is a
legitimate source of happiness to see a friend happy, it is a more
legitimate one to have made him so.  Let us show how grateful we are
for the blessing that has come to us by pouring forth our feelings,
and let us bear witness to them, not merely in the hearing of the
giver, but everywhere.  He who receives a benefit with gratitude
repays the first instalment on his debt.

There are some who are not willing to receive a benefit unless it is
privately bestowed; they dislike having a witness to the fact or
anyone aware of it.  But these, you may be sure, take a wrong view.
As the giver should add to his gift only that measure of publicity
which will please the one to whom he gives it, so the recipient should
invite the whole city to witness it; a debt that you are ashamed to
acknowledge you should not accept.  Some return their thanks
stealthily, in a corner, in one's ear; this is not discretion, but, in
a manner, repudiation; the man who returns his thanks only when
witnesses have been removed shows himself un-grateful.  Some men
object to having any record made of their indebtedness, to the
employment of factors, to the summoning of witnesses to seal the
contract, to giving their bond. These are in the same class with those
who take pains to keep as secret as possible the fact that they have
had a benefit bestowed upon them.  They shrink from taking it openly
for fear that they may be said to owe their success to the assistance
of another rather than to their own merit; they are only rarely found
paying their respects to those a to whom they owe their living or
their position, and, while they fear the reputation of being a
dependent, they incur the more painful one of being an ingrate. Others
speak worst of those who have treated them best.  It is safer to
offend some men than to have done them a service; for, in order to
prove that they owe nothing, they have recourse to hatred.  And yet
nothing ought to be made more manifest than that services rendered to
us linger in our memory, but the memory must constantly be renewed;
for only the man who remembers is able to repay gratitude, and he who
remembers does thereby repay it.  In receiving a benefit we should
appear neither fastidious nor yet submissive and humble; for, if
anyone shows indifference in the act of receiving it, when the whole
benefit is freshly revealed, what will he do when the first pleasure
in it has cooled ?  One man receives it disdainfully, as if to say: "I
really do not need it, but since you so much wish it, I will surrender
my will to yours"; another accepts listlessly,so that he leaves the
bestower doubtful about his being conscious of the benefit; still
another barely opens his lips, and shows himself more ungrateful than
if he had kept silent.

The greater the favour, the more earnestly must we express ourselves,
resorting to such compliments as: "You have laid more, people under
obligation than you think" (for every one rejoices to know that a
benefit of his extends farther than he thought); "you do not know what
it is that you have bestowed upon me, but you have a right to know how
much more it is than you think" (he who is overwhelmed shows gratitude
forthwith); "I shall never be able to repay to you my gratitude, but,
at any rate, I shall not cease from declaring everywhere that I am
unable to repay it."

No single fact more earned the goodwill of Augustus Caesar, and made
     it easy for Furnius to obtain from him other favours than his
     saying, when Augustus at his request had granted pardon to his
     father, who had supported the side of Antony.  "The only injury,
     Caesar, that I have ever received from you is this -you have
     forced me both to live and to die without expressing my
     gratitude!" For what so much proves a grateful heart as the
     impossibility of ever satisfying oneself, or of even attaining
     the hope of ever being able to make adequate return for a
     benefit?  By these and similar utterances, instead of concealing,
     let us try to reveal clearly our wishes.  Though words should
     fail, yet, if we have the feelings we ought to have, the
     consciousness of them will show in our face.  The man who intends
     to be grateful, immediately, while he is receiving, should turn
     his thought to repaying.  Such a man, declares Chrysippus, like a
     racer, who is all set for the struggle and remains shut up within
     the barriers, must await the proper moment to leap forth when, as
     it were, the signal has been given; and, truly, he will need to
     show great energy, great swiftness, if he is to overtake the
     other who has the start of him.

And now we must consider what are the principal causes of ingratitude.
The cause will be either a too high opinion of oneself and the
weakness implanted in mortals of admiring oneself and one's deeds, or
greed, or jealousy.  Let us begin with the first.  Every man is a
generous judge of himself. {Shylock+} The result is that he thinks he
has deserved all that he gets, and receives it as given in payment,
yet considers that he has not been appraised at nearly his own value.
"He has given me this," he says, "but how late, and after how much
trouble!  How much more I might have accomplished if I had chosen to
court So- and-so or So-and-so - or myself!  I had not expected this -
I have been-classed with the herd.  Was I worth so little in his eyes?
It would have been more complimentary if he had passed me by!" xxx
Gnaeus Lentulus,/a the augur, who, before his freedmen reduced him to
poverty, was the most conspicuous example of wealth - this man, who
saw his four hundred millions (I have spoken with strict accuracy, for
he did no more than " see" them!), was destitute of intelligence, as
contemptible in intellect as he was in heart.  Though he was the
greatest miser, it was easier for him to disgorge coins than words -
so great was his poverty when it came to talking. Though he owed all
his advancement to the deified Augustus, to whom he had come with
nothing but the poverty that was struggling under the burden of a
noble name, yet, when he had now become the chief citizen of the
state, both in wealth and influence, he used to make constant
complaint, saying that Augustus had enticed him away from his studies;
that he had not heaped upon him nearly so much as he had lost by
surrendering the practice of eloquence.  Yet the deified Augustus
besides loading him with other benefits, had also rescued him from
ridicule and vain endeavour!

Nor does greed suffer any man to be grateful; for incontinent hope is
never satisfied with what is given and, the more we get, the more we
covet; and just as the greater the conflagration from which the flame
springs, the fiercer and more unbounded is its fury, so greed becomes
much more active when it is employed in accumulating great riches,

And just as little does ambition suffer any man to rest content with
the measure of public honours that was once his shameless prayer.  No
one renders thanks for a tribuneship, but grumbles because he has not
yet been advanced to the praetorship; nor is he grateful for this if
he is still short of the consulship; and even this does not satisfy
him if it is a single one.  His greed ever reaches to what is beyond,
and he does not perceive his own happiness because he regards, not
whence he came, but what he would reach.  But more powerful and
insistent than all these is the evil of jealousy, which disquiets us
by making comparisons. It argues: "He who bestowed this on me, but
more on So-and-so, and an carlier gift upon So-and-so"; and, too, it
pleads no man's case, it is for itself against everybody.  But how
much simpler, how much more sensible it is to magnify the benefit
received, to be convinced that no one is as highly esteemed by another
as he is by himself!" I ought to have received more, but it was not
easy for him to give more; he had to portion out his liberality
amongst many others; this is simply the beginning, let us take it in
good part and attract his notice by accepting it gratefully; he has
done too little, but he will do something oftener; he preferred
So-and-so to me, and me to many others; So-and-so is not my equal
either in virtue or in services, but he has a charm of his own; by
complaining I shall show, not that I am deserving of greater favours,
but that I am undeserving of those that have been given.  More favours
have been given to the basest of men, but what does it matter? How
rarely is Fortune judicious!  Every day we complain that the wicked
are prosperous; often the hail-storm that has passed over the fields
of the greatest sinners smites the corn of the most upright men; each
one must endure his lot, in friendship as well as in everything else."
No benefit is so ample that it will not be possible for malice to
belittle it, none is so scanty that it cannot be enlarged by kindly
interpretation.  Reasons for complaint will never be lacking if you
view benefits on their unfavourable side.

See how unjust men are in appraising the gifts of the gods, even those
who profess to be philosophers./a {Epicureans+} They grumble because
we are inferior to elephants in size of body, to stags in swiftness,
to birds in lightness, to bulls in energy; because the skin of beasts
is tough, that of deer more comely, of bears thicker, of beavers
softer than ours; because dogs surpass us in keenness of scent, eagles
in sharpness of vision, crows in length of life, and many creatures in
the ability to swim.  And, though Nature does not suffer certain
qualities, as for instance speed of body and strength, even to meet in
the same creature, yet they call it an injustice that man has not been
compounded of various good qualities that are incompatible, and say
that the gods are neglectful of us because we have not been given the
good health that can withstand even the assaults of vice, because we
have not been gifted with a knowledge of the future. Scarcely can they
restrain themselves from mounting to such a pitch of impertinence as
actually to hate Nature because we mortals are inferior to the gods,
because we are not placed, on an equality with them.  But how much
better would it be to turn to the contemplation of our many great
blessings, and to render thanks to the gods because they were pleased
to allot to us a position second only to their own in this most
beautiful dwelling-place, because they have appointed us to be the
lords of earth! Will anyone compare us with the creatures over whom we
have absolute power? Nothing has been denied us that could possibly
have been granted to us.{Best_of_all_possible+} Accordingly, whoever
thou art, thou unfair critic of the lot of mankind, consider what
great blessings, our Father has bestowed upon us, how much more
powerful than ourselves are the creatures we have forced to wear the
yoke, how much swifter those that we are able to catch, how nothing
that dies has been placed beyond the reach of our weapons. So many,
virtues have we received, so many arts, in fine, the human mind, to
which nothing is inaccessible the moment it makes the effort, which is
swifter than the stars whose future courses through many ages it
anticipates; then, too, all the products of the field, all the store
of wealth, and all the other blessings that are piled one upon the
other.  Though you should range through all creation, and, because you
will fail to find there nothing which as a whole you would rather have
been, should select from all creatures the particular qualities that
you could wish had been given to you, yet any right estimate of the
kindliness of Nature will force you to acknowledge that you have been
her darling.  The fact is, the immortal gods have held - still hold -
us most dear, and in giving us a place next to themselves have
bestowed upon us the greatest honour that was possible.  Great things
have we received, for greater we had no room. {Essay_on_Man_I+}

These considerations, my dear Liberalis, I have thought necessary
because, on the one hand, when speaking of insignificant benefits, I
was forced to speak also of those that are supreme, and because, on
the other, the abominable presumptuousness of the vice under
consideration extends from these to all benefits.  For, if a man
scorns the highest benefits, to whom will he respond with gratitude,
what gift will he deem either great or worthy of being returned?  If a
man denies that he has received from the gods the gift of life that he
begs from them every day, to whom will he be indebted for his
preservation, to whom for the breath that he draws? Whoever,
therefore, teaches men to be grateful, pleads the cause both of men
and of the gods, to whom, although there is no thing that they have
need of since they have been placed beyond all desire; we can
nevertheless offer our gratitude.  No one is justified in making his
weakness and his poverty an excuse for ingratitude, in saying: "What
am I to do, and how begin?  When can I ever repay to my superiors, who
are the lords of creation, the gratitude that is due?" It is easy to
repay it - without expenditure if you are miserly, without labour if
you are lazy.  In fact, the very moment you have been placed under
obligation, you can match favour for favour with any man if you wish
to do so; for he who receives a benefit gladly has already returned
it.

This, in my opinion, is the least surprising or least incredible of
the paradox of the Stoic school: that he who receives a benefit gladly
has already returned it.  For, since we Stoics refer every action to
the mind, a man acts only as he wills; and, since devotion, good
faith, justice, since, in short, every virtue is complete within
itself even if it has not been permitted to put out a hand, a man can
also have gratitude by the mere act of will.  Again, whenever anyone
attains what he aimed at, he receives the reward of his effort.  When
a man bestows a benefit, what does he aim at?  To be of service and to
give pleasure to the one to whom he gives.  If he accomplishes what he
wished, if his intention is conveyed to me and stirs in me a joyful
response, he gets what he sought. For he had no wish that I should
give him anything in exchange.  Otherwise, it would have been, not a
benefaction, but a bargaining.  A man has had a successful voyage if
he reaches the port for which he set out; a dart hurled by a sure hand
performs its duty if it strikes the mark; he who gives a benefit
wishes it to be gratefully accepted; if it is cheerfully received he
gets what he wanted.  "But," you say, "he wished to gain something
besides!" Then it was not a benefit, for the chief mark of one is that
it carries no thought of a return. {Gift+} That which I have received
I received in the same spirit in which it was given thus I have made
return. Otherwise, this best of things is subjected to the worst
possible condition in order to show gratitude, I must turn to Fortune!
If I can make no other response because she is adverse, the answer
from heart to heart is enough. "What, then," you say, "shall I make no
effort to return whatever I can, shall I not hunt for the right time
and opportunity, and be eager to fill the pocket of the one from whom
I have received?" Yes, but truly benefaction is in a sorry state if a
man may not have gratitude even if his hands are empty!

"He who has received a benefit," you say, although he may have
received it in the most generous spirit, has not yet fulfilled his
whole duty, for the part of returning it still remains; just as in
playing ball there is some merit in catching the ball with adroitness
and accuracy, yet a man is not said to be a really good player unless
he is clever and prompt in sending back the ball that he has
received." But your example is not well taken; and why?  Because
success in the game depends, not upon the mind of the player, but upon
the motion and the agility of his body, and so an exhibition of which
the eye is to be the judge must be shown in its entirety.  Yet, for
all that, I am not willing to say that a man who caught the ball as he
ought was not a good player if, through no fault of his own, he was
prevented from sending it back.  "But," you say, "although the player
may not be lacking in skill since, while he did only half of his duty,
the half that he did not do he is able to do, yet the placing itself
remains imperfect, for its perfection lies in the interchange of
throwing backwards and forwards." I do not wish to refute the point
further; let us agree to this, that, not the player, but the playing,
lacks something; so also in this matter which we are now discussing,
the object given lacks something, for another corresponding to it is
still due, but the spirit of the gift lacks nothing, for it has
discovered on the other side a corresponding spirit, and, so far as
the purpose of the giver is concerned, it has accomplished all that it
wished.

A benefit has been bestowed upon me; I have received it in precisely
the spirit in which the giver wished it to be received: he
consequently has the reward he seeks, and the only reward he seeks
therefore I show myself grateful.  There remain after this his use of
me and some advantage from having a person grateful; but this comes,
not as the remainder of a duty only partially fulfilled, but as an
addition consequent to its fulfillment.  Phidias makes a statue; the
fruit of his art is one thing, that of the artistic product another;
that of his art lies in his having made what he wished to make, that
of the artistic product in his having made it to some profit; the work
of Phidias was completed even if it was not sold.  The fruit of his
work he finds is threefold: the first is the consciousness of it; this
he experiences, after the completion of his work; another is the glory
of it; a third is the benefit which he will gain either from
recognition or from the sale of it or from some other advantage.  In
the same way the first fruit of a benefaction is the consciousness of
it a man experiences this from carrying out his gift as he wished; the
second and the third are, respectively, the glory of it and the things
which may be bestowed in exchange.  And so, when a benefit has been
graciously received, the giver has forthwith received gratitude in
return, but not yet his full reward; my indebtedness, therefore, is
for something apart from the benefit, for the benefit itself I have
repaid in full by cheerfully accepting it. xxx "What, then?" you say,
"does a man repay gratitude by doing nothing?" But he has done the
chief thing - by showing a good spirit he has conferred a good, and -
what is the mark of friendship - in equal measure.  Then, in the
second place, a benefit is paid in one way, a loan in another; there
is no reason why you should expect me to flourish the payment before
your eyes - the transaction is performed in our minds!

You will come to see that what I am saying is not too bold, although
at first it may not accord with your own ideas, if only you will give
me your attention, and reflect that there are many things for which
there are no words.  There is a vast number of things that have no
name, and the terms by which we designate them, instead of being their
own, belong to other things from which they are borrowed.  We say that
we ourselves, a couch, a sail, and a poem, have a "foot," and we apply
the word "dog" to a hound, to a creature of the sea, and to a
constellation; since there are not enough words to make it possible
for us to assign a separate one to each separate thing, we borrow
whenever it becomes necessary. Bravery is the virtue that scorns
legitimate dangers, or knowing how to ward off, to meet, and to court
dangers; yet we call both a gladiator and the worthless slave whose
rashness has forced him into scorn of death a "brave" man.  Frugality
is knowing how to avoid unnecessary expenditure, or the art of
applying moderation to the use of private means; yet we call a
petty-minded and close-fisted man a very "frugal" person although
there is an infinite difference between moderation and meanness.
These are essentially different things, yet our poverty of language
leads us to call each of the two types a "frugal" person, and likewise
to say that both the man who by the exercise of reason scorns the
blows of Fortune and the one who rushes into dangers unreasoningly are
"brave." So a "benefit," as we have said, is both a beneficent act and
likewise the object itself which is given by means of the aforesaid
act, as money, a house, the robe of office; the two things bear the
same name, but they are very different in their import and operation.

Attend, therefore, and you will soon understand that I am advancing
nothing that your own conviction will reject.  For the benefit that is
accomplished by an act has been repaid by our gratitude if we give it
friendly welcome; the other, which consists of some object, we have
not yet returned, but we shall have the desire to return it.  Goodwill
we have repaid with goodwill; for the object we still owe an object.
And so, although we say that he who receives a benefit gladly has
repaid it, we, nevertheless, also bid him return some gift similar to
the one he received.

Some of the utterances that we Stoics make avoid the ordinary meaning
of the terms, and then by a different line of thought are restored to
their ordinary meaning.  We deny that the wise man can receive injury,
yet the man who strikes him with his fist will be sentenced on the
charge of doing him an injury; we deny that a fool possesses anything,
and yet a man who steals some object from a fool will be punished for
theft; we declare that all men are mad, and yet we do not dose all men
with hellebore; and to the very men whom we call mad we entrust the
right of suffrage and the jurisdiction of judge. {Swift+} So we
declare that he who receives a benefit in a kindly spirit has repaid
it by gratitude, yet, nevertheless, we leave him in debt - still bound
to repay gratitude even after he has repaid it.  The aim of this is,
not to forbid beneficence, but to encourage us not to be fearful of
benefits, not to faint under them as if we were weighed down by an
intolerable burden.  "Good things," you exclaim, "have been given to
me, my reputation has been protected, my ignominy has been removed, my
life has been preserved, and my liberty that is dearer than life.  And
how shall I ever be able to repay my gratitude?  When will there come
the day on which I can show to my benefactor my heart?" This is the
very day - the day on which he is showing his own heart!  Accept the
benefit, embrace it, rejoice, not because you are receiving it, but
because you are returning it and yet will still be in debt; you will
then avoid the risk of the great mishap that some chance may cause you
to be ungrateful.  No difficult terms will I set before you for fear
that you may be discouraged, that you may faint at the prospect of
long labour and servitude.  I do not put you off - you may pay with
what you have!  Never will you be grateful if you are not so at this
moment. What, then, shall you do?  There is no need for you to take up
arms - perhaps some day there will be.  There is no need for you to
traverse the seas - perhaps some day you will ret sail even when
storm-winds are threatening.  Do you wish to return a benefit?  Accept
it with pleasure; you have repaid it by gratitude - not so fully that
you may feel that you have freed yourself from debt, yet so that you
may be less concerned about what you still owe!

BOOK III

NOT to return gratitude for benefits is a disgrace, and the whole
world counts it as such, Aebutius Liberalis.  Therefore even the
ungrateful complain of ingratitude, while the vice that all find so
distasteful nevertheless continues its hold upon all, and we go so far
to the opposite extreme that sometimes, not merely after having
received benefits, but because we have received them, we consider the
givers our worst enemies.  I cannot deny that, while some fall into
the vice from a natural perversity, more show it because remembrance
disappears with the passing of time for benefits that at first lived
fresh in their memory wither as the days go by.  On the subject of
such persons you and I, I am well aware, have already had a
discussion, in which you said that they were, not ungrateful, but
forgetful; just as if that which caused a man to be ungrateful could
be any excuse for his being so, or as if the fact that a man had this
misfortune kept him from being ungrateful, whereas it is only the
ungrateful man who has this misfortune.

There are many sorts of ungrateful men, just as there are many sorts
of thieves and of murderers - they all show the same sin, but their
types the greatest diversity.  The man is ungrateful who denies that
he has received a benefit, which he has in fact received; he is
ungrateful who pretends that he has not received one; he, too, is
ungrateful who fails to return one; but the most ungrateful of all is
the man who has forgotten a benefit.  For the others, even if they do
not pay, continue in debt, and reveal at least some trace of the
services that they have locked in the depths of their evil hearts.
These, it may be, for one reason or another, may some day turn to the
expression of gratitude, whether urged to it by shame, or by the
sudden impulse toward honourable action that is wont to spring up for
a moment even in the hearts of bad men, or perhaps by the call of a
favorable opportunity.  But there is no possibility of a man's ever
becoming grateful, if he has lost all memory of his benefit.  And
which of the two would you call the worse - the man whose heart is
dead to gratitude for a benefit, or the one whose heart is dead even
to the memory of a benefit?  Eyes that shrink from the light are weak,
those that cannot see are blind; and not to love one's parents is to
be unfilial, not to recognize them is to be mad!

Who is so ungrateful as the man who has so completely excluded and
cast from his mind the benefit that ought to have been kept uppermost
in his thought and always before him, as to have lost all knowledge of
it?  It is evident that he has not thought very often about returning
it if it has faded into oblivion.  In short, the repaying of gratitude
requires right desire and opportunity and means and the favour of
Fortune; but he who remembers shows sufficient gratitude without any
outlay.  Since this duty demands neither effort nor wealth nor good
fortune, he who fails to render it has no excuse in which he may find
shelter; for he who has thrust a benefit so far from him that he has
actually lost sight of it never could have wished to be grateful for
it.  Just as tools that are in use and are every day subjected to the
contact of our hands never run any risk of becoming rusty, while those
that are not brought before the eyes, and, not being required, have
remained apart from constant use, gather rust from the mere passing of
time, so anything that our thought repeatedly busies itself with and
keeps fresh does not slip from the memory, which loses only that which
it has over and over again failed to regard. xxx Besides this, there
are still other causes that tend to uproot from our minds services
that sometimes have been very great.  The first and most powerful of
all is the fact that, busied as we are with ever new desires, we turn
our eyes, not to what we possess but to what we seek to possess. To
those who are intent upon something they wish to gain all that they
have already gained seems worthless.  It follows too, that, when the
desire of new benefits has diminished the value of one that has
already been received, the author of them also is less esteemed.  We
love someone, and look up to him, and avow that he laid the foundation
of our present position so long as we are satisfied with what we have
attained; then the desirability of other things assails our mind, and
we rush toward those, as is the way of mortals, who, having great
things, always desire greater.  And everything that we were formerly
inclined to call a benefit straightway slips from our memory, and we
turn our eyes, not to the things that have set us above others, but to
the things that the good fortune of those who outstrip us displays.
But it is possible for no man to show envy and gratitude at the same
time, for envy goes with complaint and unhappiness, gratitude with
rejoicing.

In the second place, because each one of us is actually aware of only
the particular moment of time that is passing, only now and then do
men turn their thought back to the past; so it happens that the memory
of our teachers and of their benefits to us vanishes because we have
left boyhood wholly behind; so, too, it happens that the benefits
conferred upon us in youth are lost because youth itself is never
relived. No one regards what has been as something that has passed,
but as something that has perished, and so the memory of those who are
intent upon a future benefit is weak.

At this point I must bear testimony to Epicurus, who constantly
complains because we are ungrateful for past blessings, because we do
not recall those that we have enjoyed, nor count them in the list of
pleasures, while no pleasure exists more certainly than one that can
no longer be snatched away.  Present blessings are not yet wholly
established upon a firm basis, it is still possible that some
mischance may interrupt them; future blessings are still in the air
and are uncertain; but what is past has been stored away in safety.
How can a man who is wholly absorbed in the present and the future,
who skips over all his past life, ever be grateful for benefits?  It
is memory that makes him grateful; the more time one gives to hope,
the less one has for memory.  There are some subjects, my dear
Liberalis, that remain fixed in our memory when we have once grasped
them, and others that, if they are to be known, require more than a
first acquaintance provides (for knowledge of them is lost unless it
is con- tinued) - l am thinking of the knowledge of geometry and of
the motions of the heavenly bodies and of other similar subjects that,
on account of their nicety, have a slippery hold.  Just so, in the
matter of benefits, there are some whose very magnitude will not allow
them to slip from our mind, while others that are smaller, yet
countless in number and bestowed at various times, escape from our
memory because, as I have said, we do not repeatedly revert to them,
and are not glad to recognize what we owe to each.  Listen to the
words of petitioners.  No one of them fails to say that the memory of
the benefit will live for ever in his heart; no one of them fails to
declare himself your submissive and devoted slave, and, if he can find
any more abject language in which to express his obligation, he uses
it.  But after a very little time these same men avoid their earlier
utterances, counting them degrading and unworthy of a free man; and
then they reach the state, to which, in my opinion, all the worst and
the most ungrateful men come - they grow forgetful.  For so surely is
he ungrateful who has forgotten that a man is ungrateful when a
benefit only "comes into his mind." xxxSome raise the question whether
a vice so odious as this ought to go unpunished, or whether this law,
by which, as it operates in the schools,/a the ungrateful man becomes
liable to prosecution, ought to be applied also in the state; for it
seems to everybody to be a just one.  "Why not?" they say, "since even
cities bring charges against cities for services rendered, and force
later generations to pay for what had been bestowed upon their
forefathers." But our forefathers, who were undoubtedly very great
men, demanded restitution only from their enemies; benefactions they
would bestow magnanimously, and lose them magnanimously. With the
exception of the people of Macedonia,/a in no state has the ungrateful
man become liable to prosecution.  And ample proof that there ought
not to have been any such liability is shown by the fact that we are
in full accord in opposing all crime; the penalty for homicide, for
poisoning, for parricide, and for the desecration of religion is
different in different places, but they have some penalty everywhere,
whereas this crime that is the commonest of all is nowhere punished,
but is everywhere denounced. And yet we have not wholly acquitted it,
but, because it is difficult to form an opinion of a thing so
uncertain, we have only condemned it to hatred, and have left it among
the sins that are referred to the gods for judgement.

But many reasons occur to me why this crime should not come under the
law.  First of all, the best part of a benefit is lost if it can
become actionable, as is possible in the case of a fixed loan or of
something rented or leased.  For the most beautiful part of a benefit
is that we gave it even when we were likely to lose it, that we left
it wholly to the discretion of the one who received it.  If I arrest
him, if I summon him before a judge, it gets to be, not a benefit, but
a loan.

In the second place, although to repay gratitude is a most
praiseworthy act, it ceases to be praiseworthy if it is made
obligatory; for in that case no one will any more praise a man for
being grateful than he will praise one who has returned a deposit of
money, or paid a debt without being summoned before a judge.  So we
spoil the two most beautiful things in human life - a man's gratitude
and a man's benefit. For what nobility does either one show - the one
if, instead of giving, he lends a benefit, the other if he makes
return, not because he wishes, but because he is forced?  There is no
glory in being grateful unless it would have been safe to be
ungrateful.

Add, too, the fact that for the application of this one law all the
law-courts in the world would scarcely be enough! Where is the man who
will not bring action?  Where is the man against whom action will not
be brought?  For all exalt their own merits, all magnify the smallest
services they have rendered to others.

Again, in all matters that become the basis of legal action it is
possible to define/a the procedure and to prohibit the judge from
unlimited liberty; it is clear, accordingly, that a just case is in a
better position if it is brought before a judge than if it is brought
before an "arbiter," because the judge is restricted by the formula of
instructions, which sets definite bounds that he cannot exceed,
whereas the other has entire liberty of conscience and is hampered by
no bonds; he can lessen the value of some fact or augment it, and can
regulate his opinion, not according to the dictates of law or justice,
but according to the promptings of humanity or pity.  But an action
for ingratitude would not place any restriction on the judge, but
would set him in a position of absolutely untrammeled authority.  For
it is not clearly determined what a benefit is, nor, too, how great it
is; that depends upon how generously the judge may interpret it.  No
law shows what an ungrateful person is; often one who has returned
what he received is ungrateful, and one who has not returned it is
grateful, On certain matters even an inexperienced judge is able to
give a verdict; for instance, when an opinion must be delivered on
whether something has, or has not, been done, when the dispute is
terminated by the giving of bonds, when common sense pronounces
judgement between the litigants.  When, however, a conjecture of
motive has to be made, when a point concerning which wisdom alone can
decide happens to be in dispute, it cannot be that for such purposes a
judge is to be taken from the general crowd of jurors/a - a man whom
income and the inheritance of equestrian fortune have placed upon the
roll,

Therefore the truth is, not that this offence has appeared quite
unfitted to be brought before a judge, but that no one has been found
who was quite fitted to be its judge; and this will cause you no
surprise if you will thresh out all the difficulties that anyone would
have if he should appear against a man arraigned on a charge of this
sort.  A gift has been made by someone of a large sum of money, but
the giver was rich, he was not likely to feel the sacrifice; the same
gift was made by another, but the giver was likely to lose the whole
of his patrimony.  The sum given is the same, but the benefit is not
the same. Take another case.  Suppose a man paid out money for one who
had been adjudged to his creditor, but in doing so drew from his own
private means; another gave the same amount, but borrowed it or begged
it, and in doing a great service was willing to burden himself with an
obligation.  Do you think that the one, for whom it was easy to bestow
a benefit, and the other, who received in order that he might give a
benefit, are both in the same class?  The timeliness, not the size, of
a gift makes some benefits great. It is a benefit to bestow the gift
of an estate that by reason of its fertility may lower the price of
grain, it is a benefit to bestow one loaf of bread in time of famine;
it is a benefit to bestow lands that have large and navigable rivers
flowing through them; it is a benefit to point out a spring of water
to a man when he is parched with thirst and can scarcely draw breath
through his dry throat. Who will match these one against another?  Who
will weigh them in the balance? The decision is difficult when it is
concerned, not with the thing, but with the significance of the thing.
Though the gifts are the same, if they are differently given their
weight is not the same.  A man may have bestowed on me a benefit, but
suppose he did not do it willingly, suppose he complained about having
bestowed it, suppose he regarded me more haughtily than was his wont,
suppose he was so slow to give that he would have conferred a greater
service if he had been quick to refuse.  How will a judge set about
appraising these benefits when the giver's words, his hesitation, and
expression may destroy all gratitude for his favour?  And what shall
we say of some gifts that are called benefits because they are
excessively coveted, while others, though they lack this common
ear-mark, are really greater benefits even if the do not appear so?
It is called a "benefit" if you have given someone the citizenship of
a powerful people, if you have escorted him to the fourteen rows/a of
the knights, if you have defended him when he was on trial for his
life.  But what of having given him useful advice? What of having kept
him from plunging into crime?  What of having struck the sword from
his hands when he planned to die?  What of having brought him
effective consolation in sorrow, and of having restored in him a
resolve to live when he was wishing to follow those for whom he
grieved?  What of having sat at his side when he was sick, and, when
his health and recovery were a matter of moments, of having seized the
right times to administer food, of having revived his failing pulse
with wine, and brought in a physician when he was dying?  Who will
estimate the value of such services?  Who will decree that benefits of
one sort counterbalance benefits of another?  "I gave you a house,"
you say.  Yes, but I warned you that yours was tumbling down upon your
head!  "I gave you a fortune," you say.  Yes, but I gave you a plank
when you were shipwrecked!  "I fought for you and received wounds for
your sake," you say.  Yes, but I by my silence gave you your life!
Since benefits may be given in one form and repayed in another, it is
difficult to establish their equality.

Besides, for the repayment of a benefit no date is set, as there is
for a loan of money; and so it is possible that one who has not yet
repaid may still repay.  Pray tell me, at the expiration of what time
is a man to be arrested for ingratitude?  Of the greatest benefits
there is no visible evidence; they often lie hidden in a silent
consciousness that only two share.  Or shall we introduce the rule of
not giving a benefit without a witness?

And then what punishment shall we fix upon for the ungrateful?  Shall
there be the same one for all though their benefits are unequal?  Or
shall it be variable, a larger or smaller one according to the benefit
each one has received?  Very well, then, the standard of evaluation
shall be money.  But what of some benefits that have the value of life
or are even greater than life?  What punishment will be pro- nounced
upon ingratitude for these?  One smaller than the benefit?  That would
be unjust!  One that is its equal - death?  But what could be more
inhuman than that benefits should end in bloodshed?

"Certain prerogatives," it is argued, "have been accorded to parents;
and, in the same way in which the case of these has been considered to
be exceptional, the case of other benefactors must also be considered
to be so." But we have given sanctity to the position of parents
because it was expedient that they should rear children; it was
necessary to encourage them to the task because they were going to
face an uncertain hazard.  You could not say to them what you say to
those who give benefits: "Choose the one to whom you will give; you
have only yourself to blame if you have been deceived; help the
deserving man." In the rearing of children nothing is left to the
choice of those who rear them - it is wholly a matter of hope.  And
so, in order that parents might be more content to run the risk, it
was necessary to give to them a certain authority.

Then, too, the situation of parents is very different for to those to
whom they have already given they none the less give, and will
continue to give, benefits, nor is there any danger of their making
false claims about having given them.  In the case of other
benefactors there must be the question not only of whether they have
received a return, but also of whether they have actually given, while
in the case of parents their services are unquestionable, and, because
it is expedient that the young should be controlled, we have placed
over them household magistrates, as it were, under whose custody they
may be held in check.

Again, the benefit from a parent was the same for all, and so it could
be evaluated once for all.  Benefits from others are diverse in
character, are unrelated and separated from each by incalculable
distances; and so they could not be brought under any fixed norm,
since it was more equitable to leave all unclassified than to place
them all in the same category.

Certain benefits cost the givers a great price, others have great
value in the eyes of the recipients, but cost the bestowers of them
nothing.  Some are given to friends, some to strangers; although the
same amount is given, it counts for more if it is given to one with
whom the beginning of an acquaintance dates from the gift of your
benefit. This one bestowed help, that other distinctions, another
consolations. You will find the person who thinks that there is no
greater pleasure, no greater boon than to have some breast on which he
may find rest in misfortune; again, you will find another who would
prefer to have concern shown for his prestige rather than for his
security; there is the man, too, who will feel more indebted to one
who adds to his safety than to his honour.  Consequently, these
benefits will assume greater or less value according as the temper of
the judge leans in the one direction or the other.  Moreover, while I
myself choose my creditor, yet I often receive a benefit from one from
whom I do not wish it, and sometimes even unwillingly I contract an
obligation. What in this case will you do?  Will you call a man
ungrateful when, without his knowing it, a benefit has been forced
upon him which had he known it, he would not have accepted?  Will you
not call him ungrateful if he does not repay it, no matter how he may
have received it?  Suppose that someone has bestowed upon me a
benefit, and that the same man later has done me an injury.  Am I
bound to endure every sort of injury because of his one gift, or will
it be the same as if I had repaid his favour because he himself
cancelled the benefit by his later injury?  And then how will you tell
whether the benefit that he received or the injury was the greater?
Time will fail me if I attempt to enumerate all the difficulties.  "By
not coming to the defence of benefits that have been given, and, by
not inflicting punishment on those who deny them, we only make men
more reluctant," you say, "to bestow others." But, on the other hand,
remember, too, that men will be much more reluctant to accept benefits
if they are going to run the risk of being forced to defend their case
in court, and of having their integrity placed in a very dubious
position.  Then, too, we ourselves, because of this possibility, will
be more reluctant to give; for no one gives willingly to the unwilling
recipient, but every one, whose own goodness and the very beauty of
his action has urged him to perform a generous deed, will give even
more willingly to those who will incur no indebtedness except what
they wish to feel.  For a good deed that looks carefully to its own
interests loses some of its glory.

Then, again, while benefits will become fewer, they will be more
genuine; but what harm is there in checking the reckless giving of
benefits?  For the very aim of those who have designed no law for this
matter has been that we should be more cautious in making gifts, more
cautious in picking those upon whom we bestow our favours.  Consider
again and again to whom you are giving: you will have no recourse to
law, no claim to restitution.  You are mistaken if you think that some
judge will come to your aid; no law will restore you to your original
estate - look only to the good faith of the recipient.  In this way
benefits maintain their prestige and are lordly; you disgrace them if
you make them the ground of litigation.  "Pay what you owe" is a
proverb most just and one that is stamped with the approval of all
nations; but in the case of a benefit it becomes most shameful.
"Pay!" But what?  Shall a man pay the life that he owes?  The
position?  The security?  The sound health?  All the greatest benefits
are incapable of being repaid.  "Yet make some return for them," you
say, "that is of equal value." But this is just what I was saying,
that, if we make merchandise of benefits, all the merit of so fine an
action will perish.  The mind does not need to be incited to greed, to
accusations, and to discord; it tends to these by a natural impulse.
But, as far as we can, let us oppose it, and cut it off from the
opportunities that it seeks.

Would that I could persuade the lenders of money to accept payment
only from those who are willing to pay!  Would that no compact marked
the obligation of buyer to seller, and that no covenants and
agreements were safeguarded by the impress of seals, but that,
instead, the keeping of them were left to good faith and a conscience
that cherishes justice!  But men have preferred what is necessary to
what is best, and would rather compel good faith than expect it.
Witnesses are summoned on both sides.  One creditor, by having
recourse to factors, causes the record to be made in the books of
several people; another is not content with oral promises, but must
also bind his victim by a written signature.  O, what a shameful
admission of the dishonesty and wickedness of the human race!  More
trust is placed in our sealrings than in our consciences.  To what end
have these notable men been summoned?  To what end do they leave the
impress of their signets? In order, forsooth, that the debtor may not
deny that what he has received has been received!  Think you that
these men are incorruptible and champions of truth?  Yet to these very
men money will not be entrusted at this hour on any other terms.  So
would it not have been more desirable to allow some men to break their
word than to cause all men to fear treachery?  The only thing that
avarice lacks now is that we should not even give benefits without a
bondsman!  To help, to be of service, is the part of a noble and
chivalrous soul; he who gives benefits imitates the gods, he who seeks
a return, money-lenders. Why, in wishing to protect benefactors, do we
reduce them to the level of the most disreputable class? {Shylock+}
xxx" More men," you say, "will become ungrateful if no action can be
brought against ingratitude." No, fewer men, because benefits will be
given with a greater discrimination. Then, too, it is not advisable
that all men should know how many are ungrateful for the multitude of
the offenders will remove the shame of the thing, and what is a
general reproach will cease to be a disgrace.  Is there any woman that
blushes at divorce now that certain illustrious and noble ladies
reckon their years, not by the number of consuls, but by the number of
their husbands, and leave home in order to marry, and marry in order
to be divorced?  They shrank from this scandal as long as it was rare;
now, since every gazette has a divorce case, they have learned to do
what they used to hear so much about.  Is there any shame at all for
adultery now that matters have come to such a pass that no woman has
any use for a husband except to inflame her paramour?  Chastity is
simply a proof of ugliness.  Where will you find any woman so
wretched, so unattractive, as to be content with a couple of paramours
- without having each hour assigned to a different one?  And the day
is not long enough for them all, but she must be carried in her litter
to the house of one, and spend the night with another.  She is simple
and behind the times who is not aware that living with one paramour is
called "marriage"!  As the shame of these offences has disappeared now
that their practice has spread more broadly, so you will make ingrates
more numerous and increase their importance if once they begin to
count their number.

"What, then," you say, "shall the ingrate go unpunished?" What, then,
shall the undutiful man go unpunished?  And the spiteful?  And the
greedy?  And the overbearing?  And the cruel?  Do you imagine that
qualities that are loathed do go unpunished, or that there is any
greater punishment than public hate?  The penalty of the ingrate is
that he does not dare to accept a benefit-from any man, that he does
not dare to give one to any man, that he is a mark, or at least thinks
that he is a mark, for all eyes, that he has lost all perception of a
most desirable and pleasant experience.  Or do you call that man
unhappy who has lost his sight, whose ears have been closed by some
malady, and yet do not call him wretched who has lost all sense of
benefits?  He dwells in fear of the gods, who are the witnesses of all
ingratitude, he is tortured and distressed by the consciousness of
having thwarted a benefit.  In short, this in itself is punishment
great enough, the fact that he does not reap enjoyment from an
experience that, as I just said, is the most delightful.

But he who is happy in having received a benefit tastes a constant and
unfailing pleasure, and rejoices in viewing, not the gift, but the
intention of him from whom he received it.  The grateful man delights
in a benefit over and over, the ungrateful man but once.  But is it
possible to compare the lives of these two?  For the one, as a
disclaimer of debts and a cheat are apt to be, is downcast and
worried, he denies to his parents, to his protector, to his teachers,
the consideration that is their due, while the other is joyous,
cheerful, and, watching for an opportunity to repay his gratitude,
derives great joy from this very sentiment, and seeks, not how he may
default in his obligations, but how he may make very full and rich
return, not only to his parents and friends, but also to persons of
lower station.  For, even if he has received a benefit from his slave,
he considers, not from whom it came, but what he received. xxx And yet
some raise the question, for example Hecaton, whether it is possible
for a slave to give a benefit to his master.  For there are those who
distinguish some acts as benefits, some as duties, some as services,
saying that a benefit is something that is given by a stranger (a
stranger is one who, without incurring censure, might have done
nothing); that a duty is performed by a son, or a wife, or by persons
that are stirred by the ties of kinship, which impels them to bear
aid; that a service is contributed by a slave, whose condition has
placed him in such a position that nothing that he can bestow gives
him a claim upon his superior.  Moreover, he who denies that a slave
can sometimes give a benefit to his master is ignorant of the rights
of man; for, not the status, but the intention, of the one who bestows
is what counts.  Virtue closes the door to no man; it is open to all,
admits all, invites all, the freeborn and the freedman, the slave and
the king, and the exile; neither family nor fortune determines its
choice -it is satisfied with the naked human being.  For what
protection would it find against sudden events, what great assurance
would the human mind be able to hold out to itself if Fortune could
rob it of unchangeable Virtue?  If a slave cannot give a benefit to
his master, no subject can give one to his king, no soldier to his
general; for, if a man is restrained by supreme authority, what
difference does it make what the nature of the authority is that
restrains him?  For, if the necessity of his lot and his fear of
having to endure untold punishment prevent a slave from attaining the
right to do a thankworthy act, the same condition will also prevent
the man who is un er a king, and the man who is under a general; for
these, under a different title, exercise equal authority.  But a man
can give a benefit to his king, a man can give a benefit to his
general; therefore a slave also can give one to a master.  It is
possible for a slave to be just, it is possible for him to be brave,
it is possible for him to be magnanimous; therefore it is possible
also for him to give a benefit, for this also is one part of
virtue. {Wyf_of_Bath+} So true is it that slaves are able to give
benefits to their masters that they have often caused their benefit to
be their masters themselves./a There is no doubt that a slave is able
to give a benefit to anyone he pleases; why not, therefore, also to
his master? "Because," you say, "it is not possible for him to become
his master's 'creditor ' if he has given him money.  Otherwise, he
makes his master in debt to him every day; he attends him when be
travels, he nurses him when he is sick, he expends the greatest labour
in cultivating his farm; nevertheless all these boons, which when
supplied by another are called benefits, are merely I 'services ' when
they are supplied by a slave.  For a benefit is someting that some
person has given when it was also within his power not to give it.
But a slave does not have the right to refuse; thus he does not
confer, but merely obeys, and he takes no credit for what he has done
because it was not possible for him to fail to do it."

Even under these conditions I shall still win the day and promote a
slave to such a position that he will, in many respects, be a free
man.  Meanwhile, tell me this - if I show to you one who fights for
the safety of his master without any regard for his own, and, pierced
with wounds, pours forth the last drops of his life-blood wn from his
very vitals, who, in order to provide time for his master to escape,
seeks to give him a respite at the cost of his own life, will you deny
that this man has bestowed a benefit simply because he is a slave? If
I show to you one who, refusing to betray to a tyrant the secrets of
his master, was bribed by no promises, terrified by no threats,
overcome by no tortures, and, as far as he was able, confounded - the
suspicions of his questioner, and paid the penalty of good faith with
his life, will you deny that this man bestowed a benefit on his master
simply because he was his slave?  Consider, rather, whether in the
case of slaves, a manifestation of virtue {virtue_in_peasants+} is not
the more praiseworthy the rarer it is, and, too, whether it is not all
the more gratifying that, despite their general aversion to domination
and the irksomeness of constraint, some slave by his affection for his
master has overcome the common hatred of being a slave.  So,
therefore, a benefit does not cease to be a benefit because it
proceeded from a slave, but is all the greater on that account,
because he could not be deterred from it even by being a slave.  It is
a mistake for anyone to believe that the condition of slavery
penetrates into the whole being of a man.  The better part of him is
exempt.  Only the body is at the mercy and disposition of a master;
but the mind is its own master, and is so free and unshackled that not
even this prison of the body, in which it is confined, can restrain it
from using its own powers, following mighty aims, and escaping into
the infinite to keep company with the stars.  It is, therefore, the
body that Fortune hands over to a master; it is this that he buys, it
is this that he sells; that inner part cannot be delivered into
bondage.  All that issues from this is free; nor, indeed, are we able
to command all things from slaves, nor are they compelled to obey us
in all things; they will not carry out orders that are hostile to the
state, and they will not lend their hands to any crime. {Freedom+}

There are certain acts that the law neither enjoins nor forbids; it is
in these that a slave finds opportunity to perform a benefit.  So long
as what he supplies is only that which is ordinarily required of a
slave, it is a "service"; when he supplies more than a slave need do,
it is a "benefit"; it ceases to be called a service when it passes
over into the domain of friendly affection.  There are certain things,
as for instance food and clothing, which the master must supply to the
slave; no one calls these benefits. But suppose the master is
indulgent, gives him the education of a gentleman, has him taught the
branches in which the freeborn are schooled - all this will be a
benefit.  Conversely, the same is true in the case of the slave. All
that he does in excess of what is prescribed as the duty of a slave,
what he supplies, not from obedience to authority, but from his own
desire, will be a benefit, provided that its importance, if another
person were supplying it, would entitle it to that name.

A slave, according to the definition of Chrysippus, is a "hireling for
life." And, just as a hireling gives a benefit if he supplies more
than he contracted to do, so a slave - when he exceeds the bounds of
his station in goodwill toward his master, and surpasses the
expectation of his master by daring some lofty deed that would be an
honour even to those more happily born, a benefit is found to exist
inside the household.  Or do you think it fair that those with whom we
become angry if they do less than they ought should not draw our
gratitude if they do more than they ought or are wont?  Do you want to
know when what a slave does is not a benefit?  When one might say of
it: "What if he had refused?" But when he has bestowed something that
he had a right to refuse to bestow, the fact that he was willing
deserves to be praised.  Benefit and injury are the opposites of each
other it is possible for a slave to give a benefit to his master if it
is possible for him to receive an injury from his master. But
cognizance of the injuries inflicted by masters upon their slaves has
been committed to an official who restrains their cruelty and lust and
their stinginess in supplying them with the necessities of life.
What, then, is the case?  Does a master receive a benefit from a
slave?  No, but a human being from a human being.  After all, whatever
was in his power, he did - he gave a benefit to his master; that you
should not receive one from a slave is in your power.  But who is so
exalted that Fortune may not force him to have need of even the most
lowly?  I shall proceed now to cite a number of instances of benefits
that differ from each other and are in some cases contradictory. One
gave to his master life, one gave death, one saved him when he was
about to perish, and, if this is not enough, one saved him by
perishing himself; another helped his master to die, another baffled
his desire.

Claudius Quadrigarius relates, in the eighteenth book of his Annals,
that, during the siege of Grumentum, just when the city had reached
its most desperate plight, two slaves deserted to the enemy and there
did good service.  Later, after the city had been captured, while the
victors were rushing hither and thither, that the two ran ahead along
the well-known streets to the house in which they had been slaves, and
drove forth their mistress in front of them; that, if anyone asked who
she was, they stated that she had been their mistress, and, indeed, a
most cruel one, and that they were taking her off to punishment.  But
that afterwards, when they had brought her outside the walls, they
concealed her with the utmost care until the fury of the enemy
subsided, and later, when the soldiers, quickly glutted, returned to
the normal conduct of Romans, that they, too, returned to theirs, and
of their own accord gave themselves into the power of their mistress.
She manumitted both on the spot, and did not think it beneath her to
have received her life at the hands of those over whom she had once
had the power of life and death.  Instead, she might even have
congratulated herself upon this fact; for, if she had been saved by
other hands, she would have had the mere gift of well-known and common
mercy, but, as it was, she became famous in story, and an example to
two cities.  In the great confusion of the city, at a time when every
one was thinking of his own interest, she was deserted by all except
these deserters; but they, playing the role of being her murderers,
deserted from the victors to the captive lady in order to reveal the
purpose that had led them to make their first desertion; and the
crowning touch to their benefit was that, in order to save the life of
their mistress, they thought it was worth the price of seeming to have
put her to death.  Believe me, it is not the act - I will not say of a
"slavish," but - of a commonplace soul to purchase a noble deed at the
cost of being thought a criminal!

When Vettius, the praetor of the Marsians, was being conducted to the
Roman general, his slave snatched a sword from the very soldier who
was dragging him along, and first slew his master. Then he said: "Now
that I have given my master his freedom, the time has come for me to
think also of myself," and so with one blow he stabbed himself. Name
to me anyone who has saved his master more gloriously.

When Caesar was besieging Corfinium, Domitius, who was confined in the
city by the blockade, ordered one of his slaves, who was likewise his
physician, to give him poison.  Observing his reluctance, he said:
"Why do you hesitate, as though this matter were wholly in your own
power; I am asking for death, but I have my sword." Whereupon the
slave assented, and gave him a concoction to drink that was harmless.
When Domitius had fallen asleep because of it, the slave went to his
master's son, and said: "Have me put under guard until you discover
from the outcome whether I have given your father poison." Domitius
did not die, and Caesar saved his life but his life had first been
saved by a slave.

During the Civil War, a slave hid away his master, who had been
proscribed, and, having put on his rings and dressed himself in his
clothes, presented himself to those searching for his master, and,
saying that he asked for nothing better than that they should carry
out their orders, forthwith offered his neck for their swords.  What a
hero! - to wish to die in place of a master in times when not to wish
a master to die was a rare show of loyalty; to be found kind when the
state was cruel, faithful when it was treacherous; to covet death as a
reward for loyalty in face of the huge rewards that are offered for
disloyalty!  And I will not omit some example from our own age.  Under
Tiberius Caesar there was such a common and almost universal frenzy
for bringing charges of treason, that it took a heavier toll of the
lives of Roman citizens than the whole Civil War; it seized upon the
talk of drunkards, the frank words of jesters; nothing was safe -
anything served as an excuse to shed blood, and there was no need to
wait to find out the fate of the accused since there was but one
outcome.  Paulus, a praetorian, while dining on a certain festive
occasion, was wearing a ring with a conspicuous stone on which the
portrait of Tiberius Caesar was engraved in relief.  I should be
acting in very silly fashion if I tried, at this point, to find a
polite way of saying that he took in his hands a chamber-pot - an
action that was noticed simultaneously by Maro, one of the notorious
informers of that time, and by a slave of the victim for whom the trap
was being set, who drew off the ring from the finger of his drunken
master.  And, when Maro called the company to witness that the
emperor's portrait had been brought in contact with something foul,
and was drawing up the indictment, the slave showed that the ring was
on his own hand.  Whoever calls such a man a slave, will also call
Maro a boon companion!

Under the deified Augustus, it was not yet true that a man's
utterances endangered his life, but they did cause him trouble.
Rufus, a man of senatorial rank, once at a dinner expressed the hope
that Caesar would not return safe from the journey that he was
planning; and he added that all the bulls and the calves/a wished the
same thing. Some of those who were present carefully noted these
words.  At the break of day, the slave who had stood at his feet when
he was dining told him what he had said at dinner while he was drunk,
and urged him to be the first to get Caesar's ear and volunteer
charges against himself.  Following this advice, Rufus met Caesar as
he was going down to the forum, and, having sworn that he had been out
of his mind the night before, expressed the hope that his words might
recoil upon his own head and the head of his children, and begged
Caesar to pardon him and restore him to favour.  When Caesar had
consented to do so, he said: "No one will believe that you have
restored me to favour unless you bestow upon me a gift," and he asked
for a sum that no favourite need have scorned, and actually obtained
it.  "For my own sake," said Caesar, "I shall take pains never to be
angry with you!" Caesar acted nobly in pardoning him and in adding to
his forgiveness liberality.  Every one who hears of this incident must
necessarily praise Caesar, but the first to be praised will be the
slave!  You need not wait for me to tell you that the slave who had
done this was set free.  Yet it was not a gratuitous act.  Caesar had
paid the price of his liberty!  After so many instances can there be
any doubt that a master may sometimes receive a benefit from a slave?
Why should a man's condition lessen the value of a service, and the
very value of the service not exalt the man's condition?  We all
spring from the same source, {Wyf_of_Bath+} have the same origin; no
man is more noble than another except in so far as the nature of one
man is more upright and more capable of good actions.  Those who
display ancestral busts in their halls, and place in the entrance of
their houses the names of their family, arranged in a long row and
entwined in the multiple ramifications of a genealogical tree - are
these not notable rather than noble?  Heaven is the one parent of us
all, whether from his earliest origin each one arrives at his present
degree by an illustrious or obscure line of ancestors.  You must not
be duped by those who, in making a review of their ancestors, wherever
they find an illustrious name lacking, foist in the name of a god.  Do
not despise any man, even if he belongs with those whose names are
forgotten, and have had too little favour from Fortune. {Wyf_of_Bath+}
Whether your line before you holds freedmen or slaves or persons of
foreign extraction, boldly lift up your head, and leap over the
obscure names in your pedigree; great nobility awaits you at its
source./a Why are we raised by our pride to such a pitch of vanity
that we scorn to receive benefits from slaves, and, forgetting their
services, look only upon their lot?  You who are a slave of lust, of
gluttony, of a harlot - nay, who are the common property of harlots -
do you call any other man a slave?  You call any other man a slave?
Whither, pray, are you being rushed by those bearers who carry around
your cushioned litter?  Whither are those fellows in cloaks, tricked
out in remarkable livery to look like soldiers - whither, I say, are
these conveying you? To some door-keeper's door, to the gardens of
some slave whose duties are not even fixed; and then you deny that
your own slave is. capable of giving you a benefit, when in your eyes
it is a benefit to have from another man's slave a kiss?  What great
inconsistency is this?  At the same time you both despise slaves and
court them - inside your threshold you are imperious and violent,
outside abject, and scorned as greatly as ever you scorn. For none are
more prone to abase themselves than those who are presumptuously
puffed up, and none are more ready to trample upon others than those
who from receiving insults have learned how to give them. {Freedom+}

These things needed to be said in order to crush the arrogance of men
who are themselves dependent upon Fortune, and to claim for slaves the
right of bestowing benefits to the end that it may be claimed also for
our sons.  For the question is raised whether children can sometimes
bestow on their parents greater benefits than they have received from
them.  It is granted me that there have been many examples of sons who
were greater and more powerful than their parents, and just as freely,
too, that they were better men.  If this is true, it is quite possible
that they bestowed on them better gifts, since they were endowed both
with greater good fortune and with better intentions.  "However that
may be," you reply, "what a son gives to a father is, in any case,
less, because he owes to his father this very power of giving.  So a
father is never surpassed in the matter of a benefit, for the very
benefit in which he is surpassed is really his own."

But, in the first place, there are some things that derive their
origin from others, and yet are greater than their origins; nor is it
true that a thing cannot be greater than that from which it begins on
the ground that it could not have advanced to its great size unless it
had had a beginning.  All things exceed by a great degree their
origins. Seeds are the causes of all growing things, and yet are the
tiniest parts of what they produce.  Look at the Rhine, look at the
Euphrates, in fact, at all the famous rivers.  What are they if you
judge of them from what they are at their source?  Whatever makes them
feared, whatever makes them renowned, has been acquired in their
progress.  Look at the trunks of trees - the tallest if you are
considering their height, the broadest if you are considering their
thickness and the reach of their branches; compared with all this, how
small a compass the slender thread of the root embraces! Yet take away
the root, and there will be no springing up of forests, and the mighty
moun- tains will lack their vesture.  The lofty temples of the city
rise upon their foundations; yet all that was thrown down to support
their whole structure lies out of sight.  The same is true in the case
of all other things; always their subsequent greatness will conceal
their first beginnings. It would not have been possible for me to
attain anything unless there had been the preceding benefit from my
parents; but it does not follow that whatever I have attained is
inferior to that without which I could not have attained it.  Unless
my nurse had suckled me when I was an infant, I should not have been
able to do any of the things that I now perform by brain and hand nor
should I have risen to the present distinction and fame that my civil
and military labours have earned for me; yet, for all that, surely you
will not set more value on the service of my nurse than on my very
weighty achievements?  But what difference is there, since it is just
as true that I should not have been able to advance to my later
accomplishments without the benefit from my nurse as without that from
my father?  But if I am indebted for all that I can now do to the
source of my being, reflect that the source of my being is not my
father, nor my grandfather, either; for there will always be something
farther removed, from which the source of a succeeding source is
derived.  Yet no one will say that I am more indebted to ancestors
that are unknown and have passed from memory than to my father; I am,
however, more indebted, if the very fact that my father has begotten
me is a debt that he owes to his ancestors.

"Whatever I have bestowed on my father," you say, "even if it is
great, falls short of the value of my father's gift to me, for, if he
had not begotten me there would be no gift." Then, too, by this manner
of reasoning, if anyone healed my father when he was sick and about to
die, I shall not be able to bestow on him any benefit that will not be
less than his to me; for my father would not have begotten me if he
had not been healed.  But take thought whether it would not be nearer
the truth to count both what I have been able to do, and what I have
done, as something of my own - the product of my own powers and of my
own will.  Consider what the fact of my birth is in itself - a small
matter of uncertain character, with a like potentiality of good and
evil, without doubt the first step to everything else, but not greater
than everything else simply because it comes first.  I have saved the
life of my father, and raised him to the highest position; I have made
him the chief citizen of his city, and have not only made him famous
by my own achievements, but also have provided him with a vast and
easy opportunity, not less safe than it is glorious, of achieving
something himself; I have loaded him with honours, with wealth, with
everything that attracts the minds of men, and, although I had place
above all others, I have taken a place below him.  Let my father now
say: "The very fact that you have been able to do these things is a
gift from your father," and I shall reply: "Yes, undoubtedly, if, in
order to do all these things, it is only necessary to be born; but, if
the factor that contributes least to successful living is being alive,
and, if you have bestowed on me merely that which I have in common
with wild beasts and some of the tiniest, even some of the foulest,
creatures, then do not take credit to yourself for something that does
not arise out of your benefits, even if it does not arise without
them.

Suppose that I have given back life for life. Even in this case I have
surpassed your gift, since I gave to one who was conscious of the
gift, and I was conscious that I was giving it; since, when I gave you
your life, it was not to indulge my own pleasure, or, at any rate, by
means of my own pleasure; since, as it is a lighter thing to die
before one learns to fear death, so it is a greater thing to retain
the breath of life than to receive it.  I gave life to one who would
straightway enjoy it, you gave it to one who would not know whether he
was alive; I gave life to one who was afraid of death, you gave life
to me, and made me subject to death; I gave to you life that was
complete and perfect, when you begot me, I was a creature without
reason and a burden to others. Do you wish to know how small a benefit
it is to give life in this way? You should have exposed me to death as
a child; of course by begetting me you did me a wrong!  What, then, is
my conclusion?  That the fact of their coition constitutes a very
small benefit on the part of a father and a mother unless they add
others which will follow up this initial gift, and confirm it by still
other services.  It is not a blessing to live, but to live well.  But
you say I do live well.  Yes, but I might also have lived ill; so the
only thing that I have from you is that I am alive.  If you claim
credit for giving me mere life, life stripped bare and bereft of
purpose, and boast of it as a great blessing, reflect that you are
claiming credit for giving me a blessing that flies and worms possess.
Finally, though I should mention no more than that I have applied
myself to liberal studies, and have directed the course of my life
along the path of rectitude, in the case of the very benefit I had
from you, you have received in return a greater one than you gave; for
you gave to me a self that was ignorant and inexperienced, and I have
given to you a son such as you might be happy to have begotten.

True, my father has supported me.  But, if I bestow the same on him, I
return more than I got, for he has joy, not only from being supported,
but from being supported by a son, and he derives greater pleasure
from the spirit of my act than from the act itself, but the food he
gave me reached only the needs of the body.  Tell me, if a man has
attained so much eminence as to be renowned throughout the world by
reason either of his eloquence or of his justice or his military
prowess, if he has been able to encompass his father also in the
greatness of fame, and by the glory of his name to dispel the
obscurity of his birth, has he not conferred upon his parents a
benefit that is beyond all estimate? Or would anyone ever have heard
of Aristo and Gryllus except for the fact that Xenophon and Plato were
their sons?  It is Socrates that does not allow the name of
Sophroniscus to die.  It would take too long to recount all the others
whose names endure only because they have been handed down to
posterity owing to the exceptional worth of their children.  Which was
the greater benefit - what Marcus Agrippa/a received from his father,
who was unknown even after having had a son like Agrippa, or what the
father received from Agrippa, who, by the glory of a naval crown,
gained a distinction that was unique among the honours of war, who
reared in the city so many mighty works that not only surpassed all
former grandeur, but later could be surpassed by none?  Which was the
greater benefit - what Octavius bestowed on his son, or what the
deified Augustus bestowed on his father, obscured as he was by the
shadow of an adoptive father?/a What joy would Octavius have
experienced if he had seen his son, after he had brought the Civil War
to an end, watching over well-established peace: he would not have
recognized the good that he had himself bestowed, and would scarcely
have believed, whenever he turned his gaze backward to himself, that
so great a hero could have been born in his house.  Why continue now
to mention all the others who would long have been buried in oblivion,
had not the glory of their sons rescued them from darkness, and kept
them in the light even to this day?

Moreover, since the question is, not what son bestowed greater
benefits on his father than he received from his father, but whether
it is possible for any son to bestow greater benefits, even if the
instances that I have cited are not convincing, and the benefits of
parents are not overtopped by those of their sons, nevertheless that
which no age has as yet produced still lies within the bounds of
nature, If single acts may not be able to surpass the magnitude of a
father's services, yet several of them combined, together will exceed
it.  Scipio saved the life of his father in battle,/b and, lad as he
was, spurred his horse into the midst of the enemy.  Is it, then, too
small a thing, if, in order to reach his father, he despised all the
dangers, by which at that very time the greatest leaders were being
hard pressed, despised all the difficulties that blocked his path, if,
in order to make his way into the front of the fight, he, tiro that he
was, galloped through the ranks of veterans, if in one bound he
outstripped his years?  Then add to this, that he also defended his
father in court, and rescued him from a conspiracy of powerful
enemies, that he heaped upon him a second and a third consulship and
other honours that even consulars might covet, that, when his father
was poor, he handed over to him the wealth that he had seized by right
of war, and made him rich even with the spoils taken from the enemy,
which to a military hero is his greatest glory.  If this is still too
little, add that he prolonged his father's extraordinary powers in his
government of the provinces, add that, after having destroyed the
mightiest cities, he, the defender and founder of the Roman Empire
that was destined to reach without a rival from the rising to the
setting sun, added to a hero already renowned the greater renown of
being called the father of Scipio!  Is there any doubt that the
commonplace benefit of his birth was surpassed by his rare filial
devotion and his valour, which brought to the city itself, I might
almost say, greater glory than protection?  Then, if this is still too
little, imagine some son that rescued his father from tortures,
imagine that he transferred them to himself.  You may extend the
benefits of a son to any length you please, whereas the gift of a
father is of one sort only, easily given, and fraught with pleasure to
the giver - one that he must necessarily have given to many others,
even to some to whom he does not know that he gave it, one in which he
has a partner, in which he has had regard for the law, his country,
the rewards that accrue to fathers, the continuance of his house and
family, for everything, in fact, but the recipient of his gift.  Tell
me, if a son has attained the wisdom of philosophy and has transmitted
it to his father, shall we still be able to argue as to whether he
gave something greater than he received, though the gift he returned
to his father was the Happy life,/a and that which he received was
merely life? xxx"But," you say, "whatever you do, whatever you are
able to bestow on your father, is a part of his benefit to you." Yes,
and the progress I have made in liberal studies is a benefit from my
teacher; nevertheless we leave behind the very teachers who bave
transmitted their knowledge, particularly those who have taught us the
alphabet, and, although no one could have accomplished anything
without them, it is, nevertheless, not true that, no matter how much
anyone has accomplished, he is still their inferior.  There is a great
deal of difference between what is first in time and what is first in
importance, and it does not follow that what is first in time is the
equivalent of what is first in importance on the ground that without
the first in time there could be no first in importance.

It is now time to produce something coined, so to speak, in the Stoic
mint./b He who has given a benefit that falls short of being the best
faces the possibility of being outdone.  A father has given life to
his son, but there is something better than life; so the father can be
outdone because he has given a benefit that falls short of being the
best.  Again, if a man who has given life to another has been freed,
time and again, from the peril of death, he has received a greater
benefit than he gave.  Now, a father has given life; if, therefore, he
should be repeatedly freed from the peril of death by his son, it is
possible for him to receive a greater benefit than he gave.  The more
need a man has of a benefit, the greater is the benefit he receives.
Now, one who is alive has more need of life than one who has not been
born, since such a one can feel no need at all; consequently, if a
father has received life from his son, he has received a greater
benefit from the son than the son received from his father by being
born.  "Benefits from a father," you say, "canot be surpassed by
benefits from a son.  And why ?  Because the son received life from
his father, and, unless he had received it, he could not have given
any benefits at all." But a father has this in common with all men who
have at any time given life to others; for these would not have been
able to return gratitude unless they had received the gift of their
lives. Consequently, you cannot return too much gratitude to a
physician (for physicians also habitually give life), nor to a sailor
if he has rescued you from shipwreck.  Yet the benefits of these and
of others, who have in some fashion given us life, are capable of
being surpassed; therefore those of a father also are capable of it.
If anyone has given to me the sort of benefit that needs to be
supplemented by benefits from many others, while I have given to him
the benefit that needs a supplement from no man, then I have given a
greater one than I have received.  Now a father gave to his son a life
which, unless it had had many accessories that preserved it, would
have perished; whereas a son, if he has given life to his father, gave
that which needed the help of no man to make it endure; therefore a
father who received his life from a son received a greater benefit
than he himself gave.  These considerations do not destroy respect for
parents, nor render children worse than their parents, but even
better; for by its very nature Virtue loves to shine, and is eager to
push ahead of any in front.  Filial devotion will be all the more
ardent if it approaches the repayment of benefits with the hope of
surpassing them.  And the fathers themselves will be willing and glad
to have it happen since, in the case of a great many things, it is to
our advantage to be surpassed.  How else comes a rivalry so desirable?
How else comes to parents a happiness so great that, in the matter of
benefits, they acknowledge themselves to be no match for their
children?  Unless we adopt this view of the matter, we supply children
with an excuse, and make them less ready to return gratitude, whereas
we ought to spur them on and say to them:

"To your task, young heroes!  A glorious contest is set before you -
the contest between parents and children to decide whether they have
given, or received, the greater benefits.  Your fathers have not won
the victory for the mere reason that they were first on the field.
Only show the spirit that befits you, and do not lose courage - they
desire to have you win.  Nor, in this glorious struggle, will there be
any lack of leaders to encourage you to do as they did, and bid you
follow their footsteps to the victory that often ere now has been won
from parents.

"Aeneas won the victory from his father; for, though he himself, in
his infancy, had been but a light and safe burden to his father's
arms, he bore his father, heavy with years, through the midst of the
lines of the enemy, through the destruction of the city that was
crashing around him, while the pious old man, clasping in his arms his
sacred relics and household gods burdened his son's progress with more
than his simple weight; he bore him through flames, and (what cannot
filial love accomplish!) bore him out of danger,/a and placed him, for
our worship, among the founders of the Roman Empire.

"Those young Sicilians/b won the victory; for, when Aetna, aroused to
unusual fury, poured forth its fire upon cities, upon fields, upon a
great part of the island, they conveyed their parents to safety.  The
fires parted, so it was believed, and, as the flames retired on either
side, a path was opened up for the passage of the youths, who greatly
deserved to perform their heroic tasks in safety.

"Antigonus won the victory; for, having vanquished the enemy in a
mighty battle, he transferred to his father the prize of the war, and
handed over to him the sovereignty of Cyprus.  This is true kingship,
to refuse to be king when you might have been.

"Manlius won the victory from his father, tyrant though he was; for,
although his father had previously banished him for a time because of
his dullness and stupidity as a youth, he went to the tribune of the
people, who had appointed a day for his father's trial; having asked
for an interview, which the tribune granted, expecting to find him a
traitor to his detested father - he believed, too, that he had earned
the gratitude of the young man, for, among other charges that he was
bringing against Manlius, the gravest was his son's exile - the youth,
when he had obtained his private audience, drew forth a sword, that he
had had concealed beneath his robe, and cried: 'Unless you swear that
you will remit the charges against my father, I shall run you through
with this sword.  It lies with you to decide which way my father shall
have of escaping his accuser.' The tribune took the oath and did not
break it, and he reported to the assembly his reason for abandoning
the action. No other man was ever permitted to put a tribune in his
place without being punished.  "There are countless instances of
others who have snatched their parents from dangers, who have advanced
them from the lowest to the highest station, and, taking them from the
nameless mass of commoners, have given them a name that will sound
throughout the ages.  No power of words, no wealth of genius can
express how great, how laudable, how sure of living in the memory of
men will be the achievement of being able to say: 'I obeyed my
parents, I gave way to their authority, whether it was just or unjust
and harsh, I showed myself humble and submissive; in only one thing
was I stubborn - the resolve not to be outdone by them in benefits.'
Struggle on, I beg of you, and, even though wearied, renew the fight.
Happy they who shall conquer, happy they who shall be conquered.  What
can be more glorious than the youth who can say to himself (for to say
it to another would be an impiety): 'I have surpassed my father in
benefits'?  What can be more fortunate than the old man who, to all
ears and in all places, will declare that in benefits he has been
surpassed by his son?  But what can be happier than to lose that
victory?

BOOK IV

OF all the questions that we have discussed, Aebutius Liberalis, none
can seem so essential, or to need, as Sallust puts it, such careful
treatment, as the one that is now before us - whether to bestow a
benefit and to return gratitude for it are in themselves desirable
ends.

Some are to be found who cultivate honourable practices for the
recompense, and care nothing for virtue that is unrewarded; whereas it
has nothing glorious in it if it shows any element of profit. For what
is more shameful than for anyone to calculate the value to a man of
being good, since Virtue neither invites by the prospect of gain, nor
deters by the prospect of loss, and, so far is she from bribing any
man with hopes and promises, that, on the contrary, she bids him spend
upon her, and is more often found in voluntary contributions.  We must
go to her, trampling under foot all self-interest; whithersoever she
calls, whithersoever she sends us we must go, without any regard for
our fortunes, sometimes even without sparing our own blood, and we
must never refuse her demands. "And what shall I gain," you ask, "if I
do this bravely, if I do it gladly?" Only the gain of having done it -
she promises you nothing besides.  If you should chance to encounter
some profit, count it as something additional. The reward of virtuous
acts lies in the acts themselves.  If a virtuous act is in itself a
desirable end, if, further, a benefit is a virtuous act, it follows
that, since they bear the same nature, they cannot be subject to a
different condition.  But that the virtuous course is in itself a
desirable end has been often and abundantly proved.

On this point we Stoics are in arms against the Epicureans, an
effeminate, sheltered/a set, who philosophize over their cups, and
hold that Virtue is but the handmaid of Pleasures, that she obeys
them, that she is their slave, and sees them enthroned above herself.
"There can be no pleasure," you say, "without virtue." But why does it
come before virtue?  Do you suppose that the question is one of mere
precedence?  The whole principle and power f virtue are thrown into
doubt.  Virtue does not exist if it is possible for her to follow;
hers is the first place, she must lead, must command, must have the
supreme position; you bid her ask for the watchword!  "What
difference," you say, "does it make?  Even I affirm that there can be
no happy life without virtue.  The very pleasure at which I aim, to
which I am enslaved,{freedom+} I disapprove of and condemn if she is
banished.  The only point in question is whether virtue is the cause
of the highest good, or is itself the highest good." Do you suppose
that the answer to this question turns upon merely making a shift in
the order? It does indeed show confusion and obvious blindness to give
preference to last things over first things.  But what I protest
against is, not that virtue is placed second to pleasure, but that
virtue is associated with pleasure at all, for virtue despises
pleasure, is its enemy, and recoils from it as far as it can, being
more acquainted with labour and sorrow, which are manly ills, than
with this womanish good of yours.

It has been needful, my Liberalis, to introduce these considerations
here, because the bestowal of the kind of benefit that is now under
discussion is a mark of virtue, and to bestow it for any reason other
than the mere bestowing of it is a most shameful act. For, if we made
contributions with the expectation of receiving a return, we should
give, not to the most worthy, but to the richest, men; as it is, we
prefer a poor man to an importunate rich man.  That is not a benefit
which has regard for the fortune of the recipient.  Moreover, if it
were only self- interest that moved us to help others, those who could
most easily dispense benefits, such as the rich and powerful and
kings, who need no help from others, would not be under the least
obligation to bestow them; nor, indeed, would the gods bestow the
countless gifts that, day and night, they unceasingly pour forth, for
their own nature is sufficient to them for all their needs, and
renders them fully provided and safe and inviolable; they will,
therefore, give to no man a benefit if their only motive in bestowing
it is a regard for themselves and their own advantage. To take
thought, not where you can best place your benefit, but where you can
derive the most gain, and from whom you can most readily collect, is
to be, not a benefactor, but a money-lender.  And, since the gods are
far removed from such concern, it follows that they will not be
liberal; for, if the only reason for giving a benefit is the advantage
of the giver, and if God can hope for no advantage from us, then no
motive is found for God's giving a benefit.

I know the answer that can be made to this: "Yes, and therefore God
does not give benefits, but, free from all care and unconcerned about
us, he turns his back on the world, and either does something else, or
- that which Epicurus counts supreme happiness - does nothing at all,
and benefits no more concern him than injuries." But he who says this
does not hearken to the voices of those who pray and of those who all
around him, lifting their hands to heaven, offer vows for blessings
public and private.  Assuredly this would not be the case, assuredly
all mortals would not have agreed upon this madness of addressing
divinities that were deaf and gods that were ineffectual, unless we
were conscious of their benefits that sometimes are presented unasked,
sometimes are granted in answer to prayer - great and timely gifts,
which by their coming remove grave menaces.  And who is so wretched,
so uncared for, who has been born to so cruel a destiny and punishment
as never to have experienced the great bounty of the gods?  Look at
those who bemoan and deplore their lot - you will find that even these
are not wholly excluded from heavenly benefits, that there is not one
to whom some benefit has not trickled from that most bountiful spring.
And the gift that at birth is dispensed equally to all - is this too
small a thing?  Though the fortunes to which we pass in later life are
dispensed in unequal measure, was it too small a thing that Nature
gave when she gave to us herself?  "God gives no benefits," you say.
Whence, then, comes all that you possess, all that you give, all that
you withhold, all that you hoard, all that you steal?  Whence come the
countless things that delight your eyes, your ears, your mind?  Whence
the profusion that supplies even our luxury?  For it is not merely our
necessities that are provided - we are loved to the point of being
spoiled!  Whence all the trees yielding their varied fruits, all the
healing plants, all the different sorts of foods distributed
throughout the whole year, so that even the slothful find sustenance
from the chance produce of the earth?  Whence, too, the living
creatures of every kind, some born upon dry and solid ground, others
in the waves, others that descend through the air, in order that every
part of Nature's domain might pay to us some tribute?  Whence the
rivers - these that encircle the fields in loveliest curves, those
that, as they flow on in their vast and navigable courses, provide a
channel for commerce, some of which in the days of summer undergo a
wonderful increase in size in order that, by the sudden overflow of
the summer torrent, they may water the parched lands that lie
outstretched beneath a burning sky?  And what of the springs of
healing waters?  What of the warm waters that bubble forth upon the
very coast of the sea?

And thee, O lordly Larius, and, Benacus, thee,

Rising with a roar of billows like the sea?/a If anyone had made vou a
gift of but a few acres, you would say that you had received a
benefit; and do you say that the illimitable stretches that the earth
opens to you are not a benefit?  If anyone has presented you with
money, and, since this is a great thing in your eyes, has filled your
coffer, you will call it a benefit.  God has planted in the earth
countless mines, has drawn forth from its depths countless rivers that
over the lands where they flow carry down gold; silver and copper and
iron in huge store have been buried in all places, and he has given to
you the means of discovering them by placing upon the surface of the
earth the signs of its hidden treasures yet do you say that you have
received no benefit?  If you should receive the gift of a house that
was resplendent with marble and a ceiling gleaming with gold or decked
out with colours, you would call it no commonplace gift. God has built
for you a huge mansion that need not fear conflagration or ruin, a
house in which you see, not flimsy veneers/a thinner than the very
blade by which they are sawn, but virgin masses of most precious
stone, whole masses of a substance with such a variety of markings
that the tiniest fragments of it fill you with wonder, and a ceiling
gleaming in one fashion by night, and in another by day - yet do you
say that you have received no gift?  And, though you prize greatly
these blessings that you possess, do you act the part of an ungrateful
man, and consider that you are indebted to no one for them?  Whence do
you have that breath which you draw? Whence that light by which you
distribute and order the acts of your life?  Whence the blood that by
its circulation maintains the heat of life?  Whence those dainties
that by rare flavours excite your palate when it is already sated?
Whence those provocatives of pleasure when it palls?  Whence this
repose in which you wither and rot?  Will you not, if you are
grateful, say i.e., of marble.  A god for us this ease hath wrought.
For he Shall ever be a god indeed to me, And many a firstling lamb his
altar stain From out our flock. You see what boons I gain My oxen by
his bounty roam at will,

While I fond airs upon my pipe can trill?/a <Virg.Ecl>

But God is he who has set free, not a few oxen, but herds throughout
the whole earth, who everywhere supplies food to the flocks as they
range far and wide, who after pastures of summer has provided pastures
of winter, who has not merely taught how to play upon the pipe and to
fashion a tune that, rustic and artless as it is, yet shows some
regard for form, but has invented countless arts, the countless
variations of the voice, the countless tones that will produce
melodies, some by the breath of our body, others by the breath of an
instrument./b For you must not say that whatever we have invented is
our own any more than the fact of our growth, or the fact that the
behaviour of our body corresponds with the fixed, periods of life; now
comes the loss of childhood's teeth, now, as age gradually advances
and passes into the hardier stage, puberty and the last tooth that
marks the end of the progress of youth. In us are implanted the seeds
of all ages, the seeds of all the arts, and it is God, our master, who
draws forth from the secret depths of our being our various talents.
"It is Nature," you say, "who supplies me with these things." But do
you not understand that, when you say this, you merely give another
name to to God?  For what else is Natuure but God and the Divine
Reason that pervades the whole universe and all its parts?
{Wordsworth+} You may, as often as you like, address this being who is
the author of this world of ours by different names; it will be right
for you to call him Jupiter Best and Greatest, and the Thunderer and
the Stayer, a title derived, not from the fact that, as the historians
have related, the Roman battle-line stayed its flight in answer to
prayer,/a but from the fact that all things are stayed by his
benefits, that he is their Stayer and Stabilizer.  If likewise you
should call him Fate, it would be no falsehood; for, since Fate is
nothing but a connected chain of causes, he is the first of all the
causes on which the others depend.  Any name that you choose will be
properly applied to him if it connotes some force that operates in the
domain of heaven - his titles may be as countless as are his benefits.

Our school regard him both as Father Liber and as Hercules and as
Mercury -Father Liber, because he is the father of all things, he who
first discovered the seminal power that is able to subserve life
through pleasure; Hercules, because his power is invincible, and,
whenever it shall have grown weary with fulfilling its works, shall
return into primal fire/b; Mercury, because to him belong reason and
number and order and knowledge.  In whatever direction you turn, you
will see God coming to meet you; nothing is void of him, he himself
fills all his work. {Wordsworth+} For this reason, O most ungrateful
of mortals, it is futile for you to say that you are indebted, not to
God, but to Nature, for there is no Nature without God, nor God
without Nature, but both are the same thing, they differ only in their
function.  If, having received a gift from Seneca, you were to say
that you were indebted to Annaeus or to Lucius,c you would be
changing, not your creditor, but his name, for, whether you designated
him by his first, his second, or his third name, he would nevertheless
be the same person.  So, if you like, speak of Nature, Fate, Fortune,
but all these are names of the same God, who uses his power in various
ways.  And justice, honesty,/a prudence, courage, temperance are the
good qualities of only one mind; if you take pleasure in any of these,
you take pleasure in that mind.

But, not to be drawn aside into further controversy, God bestows upon
us very many and very great benefits, with no thought of any return,
since he has no need of having anything bestowed, nor are we capable
of bestowing anything on him; consequently, a benefit is something
that is desirable in itself.  It has in view only the advantage of the
recipient; so, putting aside all interests of our own, let us aim
solely at this. xxx"Yet you say," someone retorts, "that we ought to
take care to select those to whom we would give benefits, since even
the farmer does not commit his seeds to sand; but if this is true,
then in giving benefits we are seeking our own advantage, just as
surely as in ploughing and sowing; for sowing is not something that is
desirable in itself.  Moreover, you inquire where and how you should
bestow a benefit, which there would be no need of doing if giving a
benefit is something that is desirable in itself, since, in whatever
place and in whatever fashion it was bestowed, it would still be a
benefit." But we pursue honour solely for its own sake; yet, even if
we should have no other reason for pursuing it, we do inquire what we
should do and when and how we should do it; for it is just through
these considerations that honour has its being.  And so, when I select
the person to whom I would give a benefit, I am thinking of this - how
and when a gift is a benefit; for if it is given to one who is base,
it can be neither an honourable act nor a benefit.

To restore a deposit is something that is desirable in itself; yet I
shall not always restore it, nor at every time or in every place.
Sometimes it is a matter of indifference whether I deny a deposit or
restore it openly.  I shall always regard the interest of the one to
whom I am intending to restore a deposit, and shall refuse to do so if
it will do him harm.  I shall proceed in the same way in the matter of
a benefit.  I shall consider when to give it, to whom to give it, and
how and why.  For reason should be applied to everything we do and no
gift can be a benefit unless it is given with reason, since every
virtuous act is accompanied by reason.  How often, when men are
reproaching themselves for some thoughtless benefaction, do we hear
the words : "I would rather have lost it than have given it to him"!
Thoughtless benefaction is the most shameful sort of loss, and it is a
much greater offence to have ill bestowed a benefit than to have
received no return; for it is the fault of another if we have received
no return, while, if we did not select the one to whom we were giving,
the fault is our own.  In making my choice no considerations will
influence me so little as the one you suppose - who will be likely to
make me some return; for I choose a person who will be grateful, not
one who is likely to make a return, and it often happens that the
grateful man is one who is not likely to make a return, while the
ungrateful man is one who has made a return.  It is to the heart that
my estimate is directed; consequently I shall pass by the man who,
though rich, is unworthy, and shall give to one who, though poor, is
good; for he will be grateful in the midst of extreme poverty, and,
when he lacks all else, this heart he will still have.  It is not gain
that I try to get from a benefit, nor pleasure, nor glory; content
with giving pleasure to one human being, I shall give with the single
purpose of doing what I ought.  But I am not without choice in doing
what I ought.  Do you ask what the nature of this choice will be I
shall choose a man who is upright, sincere, mindful, grateful,
{integrum+} {simplicem+} {memorem+} {gratum+} keeps his hands from
another man's property, who is not greedily attached to his own, who
is kind to others; although Fortune may bestow upon him nothing with
which be may repay my favour, I shall have accomplished my purpose
when I have made choice of such a man.  If I am made liberal by
self-interest and mean calculation, if my only purpose in doing a
service to a man is to have him in turn do a service to me, I shall
not give a benefit to one who is setting out for distant and foreign
countries, never to return; I shall not give to one who is so ill that
he has no hope of recovery; I shall not give when my own health is
failing, for I shall have no time to receive a return.  And yet, that
you may know that generous action is something desirable in itself,
the foreigner who has just put into our harbour, and will straightway
depart, receives our assistance; to a shipwrecked stranger, in order
that he may sail back home, we both give a ship and equip it.  He
leaves us scarcely knowing who was the author of his salvation, and,
expecting never more to see our faces again, he deputes the gods to be
our debtors, and prays that they may repay the favour in his stead;
meanwhile we rejoice in the consciousness of having given a benefit
that will yield no fruit.  And tell me, when we have reached the very
end of life, and are drawing up our will, do we not dispense benefits
that will yield us nothing?  How much time is spent, how long do we
debate with ourselves to whom and how much we shall give!  For what
difference does it make to whom we give since no one will make us any
return?  Yet never are we more careful in our giving, never do we
wrestle more in making decisions than when, with all self-interest
banished, only the ideal of good remains before our eyes; we are bad
judges of our duties only so long as they are distorted by hope and
fear and that most slothful of vices,{Hal+} pleasure.  But when death
has shut off all these, and has brought us to pronounce sentence as
incorrupt judges, we search for those who are most worthy to inherit
our possessions, and there is nothing that we arrange with more
scrupulous care than this which is of no concern to ourselves. Yet,
heavens! the great joy that comes to us as we think: "Through me this
man will become richer, and I, by increasing his wealth, shall add new
lustre to his high position." If we give only when we may expect some
return, we ought to die intestate!

"You say," someone retorts, "a benefit is a loan that cannot be
repaid; but a loan is not something that is desirable in itself."
{Polonius+} When I use the term "loan," I resort to a figure, a
metaphor; for in the same way I can also say that a law is the measure
of justice and injustice, and a measure is not something desirable in
itself. We resort to such terms for the purpose of making something
clear; when I say a "loan," a quasi-loan is understood.  Do you wish
to know the difference? I add the words "that cannot be repaid,"
whereas every true loan either can or ought to be repaid.  So far from
its being right for us to give a benefit from a motive of
self-interest, often, as I have said, the giving of it must involve
one's own loss and risk.  For instance, I come to the rescue of a man
who has been surrounded by robbers although I am at liberty to pass by
in safety. By defending an accused man, who is battling with
privilege, I turn against.myself a clique of powerful men, and shall
be forced perhaps by the same accusers to put on the mourning that I
have removed from him, although I might take the other side, and look
on in safety at struggles that do not concern me; I go bail for a man
who has been condemned, and, when a friend's goods are put up for
sale, I quash the indictment, and shall probably make myself
responsible for what he owes to his creditors; in order to save a
proscribed person, I myself run the risk of proscription.

No one, when he wishes to acquire an estate at Tusculum or at Tibur
because of their healthfulness and the retreat they afford in summer,
stops to consider at how many years' purchase/b he is going to buy;
when once he has bought/c it, he must look after it. In the case of a
benefit the same principle applies; for, when you ask me what the
return will be, I answer, "the reward of a good conscience." What
return does one have from a benefit?  Do you, pray, tell me what
return one has from justice, from innocence, from greatness of soul,
{magnitudo_animi+} from chastity, from temperance; if you seek for
anything besides the virtues themselves, it is not the virtues
themselves that you seek. To what end does heaven perform its
revolutions?  To what end does the sun lengthen and shorten the day?
These are all benefits, for they take place in order to work good to
us.  Just as it is the office of heaven to perform its revolutions in
the fixed order of Nature, and that of the sun to shift the points at
which it rises and sets, and to do these things that are serviceable
to us without any reward, so it is the duty of man, amongst other
things, to give also benefits.  Why, then, does he give?  For fear
that he should fail to give, for fear that he should lose an
opportunity of doing good. {giving_motive+} You count it pleasure to
surrender your miserable body to sluggish ease, to court a repose that
differs not much from sleep, to lurk in a covert of thick shade and
beguile the lethargy of a languid mind with the most delicate
thoughts, which you call tranquillity, and in the secret retreats of
your gardens to stuff with food and drink your bodies that are pallid
from inaction; we count it pleasure to give benefits, even at the
price of labour, if only they will lighten the labours of others, even
at the price of danger, if only they will extricate others from
dangers, even at the expense of burdening our budgets, if only they
will relieve the needs and distresses of others.  What difference does
it make whether my benefits are returned?  Even after they have been
returned, they must be given again.  A benefit views the interest, not
of ourselves, but of the one upon whom it is bestowed; otherwise, it
is to ourselves that we give it.  And so many services that confer the
utmost advantage on others lose claim to gratitude because they are
paid for.  The trader renders service to cities, the physician to the
sick, the slave-monger to those he sells; but all these, because they
arrive at the good of others through seeking their own, do not leave
those whom they serve under any obligation.  That which has gain as
its object cannot be a benefit.  "I shall give so much and get so much
in return " is pure barter.

I should not call that woman chaste who repulses a lover in order to
inflame him, who is afraid either of the law or of her husband.  As
Ovid puts it:/a

She who sinned not because she could not - sinned.  A woman who owes
her chastity, not to herself, but to fear, is very rightly put in the
class of sinners.  In the same way, he who has given a benefit in
order that he may get something back has really not given it.  At this
rate, we also give a benefit to the animals that we rear in order that
they may provide us either with service or with food!  We give a
benefit to the orchards that we tend in order that they may not suffer
from drought or the hardness of untilled and neglected ground.  But it
is not justice nor goodness that moves anyone to cultivate a field, or
to perform any act that involves some reward apart from the act
itself.  The motive that leads to the giving of a benefit is not
greedy nor mean, but is humane and generous, a desire to give even
when one has already given, and to add new and fresh gifts to old
ones, having as its sole aim the working of as much good as it can for
him upon whom it bestows; whereas it is a contemptible act, without
praise and without glory, to do anyone a service because it is to our
own interest.  What nobleness is there in loving oneself, in sparing
oneself, in getting gain for oneself?  The true desire of giving a
benefit summons us away from all these motives, and, laying hand upon
us, forces us to put up with loss, and, forgoing self-interest, finds
its greatest joy in the mere act of doing good.

Can there be any doubt that the opposite of a benefit is an injury?
Just as doing an injury is something that in itself must be avoided
and shunned, so giving a benefit is something that is desirable in
itself.  In one case, the baseness of the action outweighs all the
rewards that urge us to the crime, in the other, we are incited to the
action by the idea of virtue, which is in itself a powerful incentive.
I shall not be guilty of misstatement if I say that everyone takes
delight in the benefits he does, that everyone is so disposed that he
is made more happy by seeing the one upon whom he has heaped benefits,
that everyone finds in the fact of having given one benefit a reason
for giving a second one.  And this would not happen if the benefits
themselves were not the source of his pleasure.  How often will you
hear a man say: "I cannot bear to desert him, for I have given him his
life, I have rescued him from peril.  He now begs me to plead his
cause against men of influence; I do not want to, but what can I do?
I have already helped him once, no, twice." Do you not see that there
is, inherent in the thing itself, some peculiar power that compels us
to give benefits, first, because we ought, then, because we have
already given them?  Though in the beginning we may have had no reason
for bestowing anything upon a man, we continue to bestow because we
have already bestowed; and so untrue is it that we are moved to give
benefits from a motive of profit, that we persist in maintaining and
cherishing those that are unprofitable, solely from an affection for
the benefit, to which, even though it has been unfortunately placed,
we show indulgence as naturally as we might to children who
misbehave. These same opponents a admit that they themselves return
gratitude, yet not because it is right, but because it is expedient.
But to prove that this is false is an easier task, because the same
arguments by which we have established that to give a benefit is
something that is desirable in itself establish this also.  The one
fixed principle from which we proceed to the proof of other points is
that the honourable is cherished for no other reason than because it
is honourable+.  Who, therefore, will dare to raise the question
whether it is honourable to be grateful?  Who does not loathe the
ungrateful man, a person who is unprofitable even to himself? And tell
me, when you hear it said of someone: "He is ungrateful for very great
benefits," what are your feelings?  Is it as though he had done
something base, or as though he had omitted to do something that was
expedient and likely to be profitable to himself?  I imagine you count
him a worthless fellow, who should have, not a guardian, but
punishment; but this would not be the case unless to be grateful were
something that is desirable in itself and honourable.  Other
qualities, perhaps, manifest their worth less clearly, and, in order
to decide whether they are honourable, we need an interpreter.  This
one is open to the view, and is too beautiful to have its glory dimmed
or obscured.  What is so praiseworthy, upon what are all our minds so
uniformly agreed, as the repayment of good services with gratitude?
Tell me, what is the motive that leads to this?  Gain?  But he who
does not scorn gain is ungrateful.  Vainglory?  And what is there to
boast about in having paid what you owe?  Fear?  The ungrateful man
has none; for this is the only crime for which we have provided no
law, on the theory that Nature has taken sufficient precautions
against it.  Just as there is no law that bids us love our parents or
indulge our children, for it is useless to push us in the direction in
which we are already going, just as no one needs to be urged to self-
love, which seizes him even while he is being born, so, too, there is
none for this, no law that bids us seek the honourable in and for
itself; it pleases us by its very nature, and so attractive is virtue
that even the wicked instinctively approve of the better course./a Who
is there who does not wish to seem beneficent? who,even in the midst
of his crimes and injuries, does not aspire to a reputation for
goodness? who does not clothe even his most violent acts with some
semblance of righteousness, and wish to have the appearance of having
given a benefit even to those whom he has injured? {evil_as_good+} And
so men suffer those whom they have ruined to render them thanks, and
they make a pretence of being good and generous because they are not
able to, prove themselves so.  But they would not do this unless the
love of what is right and desirable in itself forced them to seek a
reputation at variance with their characters, and conceal the
wickedness, which they regard with hatred and shame, while they covet
its fruits; no one has ever so far revolted from Nature's law and put
aside humanity as to be evil for the pleasure of it. {Iago+} For ask
any of the men who live by robbery whether they would not prefer to
attain by honourable means the things that they get by brigandage and
theft.  The man who gets his living by highway robbery and by
murdering travellers will desire rather to find his booty than to
snatch it; you will discover no one who would not prefer to enjoy the
rewards of wickedness without the wickedness.  Of all the benefits
that we have from Nature this is the greatest, the fact that Virtue
causes her light to penetrate into the minds of all; even those who do
not follow her see her.

To prove to you that the sentiment of gratitude is something to be
desired in itself, ingratitude is something to be avoided in itself
because there is nothing that so effectually disrupts and destroys the
harmony of the human race as this vice.  For how else do we live in
security if it is not that we help each other by an exchange of good
offices? It is only through the interchange of benefits that life
becomes in some measure equipped and fortified against sudden
disasters.  Take us singly, and what are we?  The prey of all
creatures, their victims, whose blood is most delectable and most
easily secured.  For, while other creatures possess a strength that is
adequate for their self-protection, and those that are born to be
wanderers and to lead an isolated life have been given weapons, the
covering of man is a frail skin; no might of claws or of teeth makes
him a terror to others, naked and weak as he is, his safety lies in
fellowship. {social_animal+}

God has given to him two things, reason and fellowship, which, from
being a creature at the mercy of others, make him the most powerful of
all; and so he who, if he were isolated, could be a match for none is
the master of the world.  Fellowship has given to him dominion over
all creatures; fellowship, though he was begotten upon the land, has
extended his sovereignty to an element not his own, and has bidden him
be lord even upon the sea; it is this that has checked the assaults of
disease, has made ready supports for old age, has provided solace for
sorrow; it is this that makes us brave, this that we may invoke as a
help against Fortune.  Take away this fellowship, and you will sever
the unity of the human race on which its very existence depends; yet
you will take it away if you succeed in proving that ingratitude is to
be avoided, not because of itself, but because it has something to
fear; for how many there are who might safely be ungrateful!  In fine,
any man who is made grateful by fear I call ungrateful.

No sane man fears the gods; for it is madness to fear what is
beneficial, and no one loves those whom he fears.  You, Epicurus, in
the end leave God unarmed, you have stripped him of all his weapons,
of all his power, and, in order that no one may have need to fear him,
you have thrust him beyond the range of fear.  Surrounded, therefore,
as he is, by a vast and impassable wall, and removed beyond the reach
and sight of mortals, you have no reason to stand in awe of him; he
has no means of bestowing either blessing or injury; in the space that
separates our own from some other heaven a he dwells alone, without a
living creature, without a human being, without a possession, and
avoids the destruction of the worlds that crash around and above him,
having no ear for our prayers and no concern for us.  And yet you wish
to seem to worship this being, from a feeling of gratitude, I suppose,
as if he were a father; or, if you do not wish to seem grateful,
because you have from him not a single benefit, but are yourself
merely a combination of atoms/b and of those mites of yours that have
met blindly and by chance, why do you worship him?  "Because of his
glorious majesty," you say and his exceptional nature." Granting that
you do this, you clearly do it without the inducement of any reward,
of any expectation; there is, therefore, something that is desirable
in itself, whose very worth induces you, that is, the
honourable. {honestum+} But what is more honourable than gratitude?
The opportunity for this virtue is limited only by life. "Bnbsp; "But
this good," you say, "has in it also some element of profit." What
virtue, indeed, has not?  But that is said to be desired because of
itself which, although it possesses some outside advantages, still
pleases even when these have been stripped of and removed.  There is
advantage in being grateful; yet I shall be grateful even if it harms
me.  And what is the aim of one who is grateful?  Is it that his
gratitude may win for him more friends, more benefits?  What, then, if
a man is likely to arouse disfavour by it, if a man knows that, so far
from being likely to gain anything by it, he must lose much from the
store that he has already acquired, does he not gladly submit to his
losses?  He is ungrateful who in the act of repaying gratitude has an
eye on a second gift -who hopes while he repays. I call him ungrateful
who sits at the bedside of a sick man because he is going to make his
will, who finds room for an thought of an inheritance or a legacy.
Though he should do everything that a good and thoughtful friend ought
to do, if his mind is haunted by the hope of gain, he is only a fisher
for legacies an is just dropping his hook.  As birds of prey that feed
upon carcasses keep watch near by the flocks that are spent with
disease and are ready to drop, so such a man gloats over a death-bed
and hovers about the corpse.

But the grateful heart is attracted by the very excellence of its
purpose.  Do you wish proof that this is so, and that it is not
corrupted by the idea of profit?  There are two classes of grateful
men.  One man is said to be grateful because he has made return for
something that he received; he, perhaps,is able to make himself
conspicuous, has something to boast about, something to publish.  He,
too, is said to be grateful who has accepted a benefit in good spirit,
who owes in good spirit; this man keeps his gratitude shut up in his
heart.  What profit can he gain from this hidden feeling? Yet such a
man, even if he is able to do no more than this, is grateful. He
loves, is conscious of his debt, desires to repay the favour; whatever
else you may find wanting, nothing is wanting in the man himself.  A
man may be an artist even if he does not have at hand the tools for
practising his craft, nor is one less a trained singer if the noise of
those who are crying him down does not permit his voice to be heard.
I wish to repay a favour: after this something is left for me to do,
not in order to become grateful, but in order to become free/a; for it
often happens that he who has repaid a favour is ungrateful, and he
who has not repaid it is grateful. For, as in the case of all the
others, the true estimate of this virtue is concerned wholly with the
heart; if this does its duty, whatever else is lacking is the fault of
Fortune.  Just as a man can be fluent in speech even if he is silent,
brave even if his hands are folded, or even tied, just as a man can be
a pilot even when he is on dry land, since there is no deficiency in
the completeness of his knowledge even though something prevents him
from using it, so also a man is grateful who only wishes to be so, and
has none besides himself to bear witness to this desire.  And I will
go even further than this - sometimes a man is grateful even when he
appears to be ungrateful, when rumour with its evil tongue has given
the opposite report of him.  What guide has this man but his own
conscience?  Crushed though it be, this gives him cheer, this cries
out against the mob and hearsay, and relies wholly upon itself, and,
when it sees the vast crowd of those on the other side who think
differently, it does not take trouble to count votes, but wins the
victory by its single vote.  If it sees its own loyalty subjected to
the chastisements reserved for treachery, it does not descend from its
pinnacle, but abides there superior to its punishment. "I have," it
says, "what I wished, what I strove for; I do not regret it, nor shall
I ever regret it, and no injustice of Fortune shall ever bring me to
such a pass that she will hear me say: 'What was it I wished?  What
profit have I now from my good intention?'" I have profit even on the
rack, I have profit even in the fire; though fire should devour my
limbs one by one, and gradually encircle my living body, though my
very heart, brimming with conscious virtue, should drip with blood, it
will delight in the flame through which its loyalty will shine forth.

The following argument also, although it has already been used, may be
reapplied here: why is it that we wish to be grateful at the hour of
death, that we carefully weigh the services of each one, that, with
memory as judge of the whole of our life, we try to avoid the
appearance of having forgotten the service of any?  Nothing then is
left for us to hope for; nevertheless, as we pause upon the
threshwold, e wish to appear as grateful as possible at the time of
our departure from human affairs.  It is evident that the great reward
for an action lies in the deed itself, and that virtue has great power
in influencing the minds of men, for souls are flooded with its
beauty, and, marvelling at the brilliance and splendour of it, are
transported with enchantment.  "But there are many advantages," you
say, "that spring from it; good men live in greater security, and have
the love and respect of good men, and existence is less troubled when
accompanied by innocence and gratitude." Nature would, indeed, have
been most unjust if she had made so great a good an unhappy and
uncertain and unfruitful thing.  But the point to consider is whether
you would turn your steps toward this virtue, which often is reached
by a safe and easy way, even though the path lay over rocks and
precipices, and was beset with wild beasts and serpents.  It is not
true, therefore, that that which has also some extraneous profit
closely attached to it is not something to be desired in itself; for
in most cases the things that are most beautiful are accompanied by
many accessory advantages, but they follow in the train of beauty
while she leads the way.  Does anyone doubt that the sun and the moon
in their periodic revolutions exercise an influence upon this
abiding-place of the human race?  That the heat of the one gives life
to our bodies, loosens the hard earth, reduces excessive moisture, and
breaks off the bonds of gloomy winter that enchains all things, while
the warmth of the other with its efficacious and pervasive power
dtermines the ripening of the crops?  That there is some relation
between human fecundity and the course of the moon?  That the one by
its circuit marks out the year, and the other, moving in a smaller
orbit, the month?  Yet, although these advantages should be removed,
would not the sun itself form a fitting spectacle for our eyes, and be
worthy of our adoration if it merely passed across the sky?  Would not
the moon be a sight worthy of our eyes even if it traversed heaven as
idly as a star? And the firmament itself - who is not held spellbound
by it whenever it pours forth its fires by night and glitters with its
horde of countless stars?  Who, when he marvels at them, stops to
think of their utility to himself?  Behold the mighty company as it
glides by overhead, how, under the appearance of an organism that is
immovable and at rest, its members conceal from us their speed.  How
much takes place in that night of which we take note only for the
purpose of numbering and distinguishing the days! What a multitude of
events is being unrolled beneath this silence!  What a chain of
destiny is being traced by their unerring path!  These bodies, which
you imagine have been strewn about for no other purpose than for
ornament, are one and all at work.  For there is no reason why you
should suppose that there are only seven wandering stars, and that all
the others are fixed; there are a few whose movements we apprehend,
but, farther removed from our sight, are countless divinities a that
go their rounds, and very many of those that our eyes can reach
proceed at an imperceptible pace and veil their movements.  Tell me,
would you not be captivated by the sight of such a mighty structure
even if it did not cover you, guard you, cherish you and give vou
birth, and permeate you with its spirit?  As the heavenly bodies have
primarily their use, and are necessary and vital to us, while it is
their majesty that wholly occupies our minds, so virtue in general,
and particularly that of gratitude, while it does indeed bestow much
upon us, does not wish to be cherished because of this; it has in it
something more, and he who counts it merely among the useful things
has not properly comprehended it.  Is a man grateful because it is to
his advantage?  Accordingly, also,to the extent that it is to his
advantage?  But Virtue does not open her door to a niggardly lover; he
must come to her with an open purse.  It is the ungrateful man who
thinks: "I should have liked to return gratitude, but I fear the
expense, I fear the danger, I shrink from giving offence; I would
rather consult my own interest." It is not possible to render men
grateful and ungrateful by the same line of reasoning; as their
actions are different, their intentions are different. The one is
ungrateful, although he ought not to be, because it is to his
interest; the other is grateful, although it is not to his interest,
because he ought to be.  It is our aim to live according to Nature,
and to follow the example of the gods.  Yet, in all their acts, what
inducement have the gods other than the very principle of action/a?
Unless perchance you suppose that they obtain a reward for their deeds
from the smoke of burnt offerings and the odour of incense!  See the
gigantic efforts they make every day, the great largesses they
dispense; with what wealth of crops they fill the land, with what
favourable winds that bear us to all shores they ruffle the seas, with
what mighty rains, suddenly hurled down, they soften the soil, renew
the dried sources of springs, and, flooding them with secret
nourishment, give them new life!  They do all these things without any
reward, without attaining any advantage for themselves.  Our rule
also, if it would not depart from its model, should observe this
principle of never proceeding to virtuous acts for pay.  We should be
ashamed to set a price on any benefit whatsoever - the gods are ours
for nothing! {nature_according_to}

"If you are imitating the gods," you say, "then bestow benefits also
upon the ungrateful; for the sun rises also upon the wicked, and the
sea lies open also to pirates." This point raises the question whether
a good man would bestow a benefit upon one who was ungrateful, knowing
that he was ungrateful.  Permit me here to put in a brief remark for
fear that we may be trapped by the tricky question.  Understand that,
according to the system of the Stoics, there are two classes of
ungrateful persons.  One man is ungrateful because he is a fool+; a
fool is also a bad man a because he is a bad man, he possesses every
vice: therefore he is also ungrateful.  Thus we say that all bad men
are intemperate, greedy, voluptuous, and spiteful, not because every
individual has all these vices in a great or marked degree, but
because he is capable of having them; and he does have them even if
they are not visible.  Another man is ungrateful, and this is the
common meaning of the term, because he has a natural tendency to this
vice.  To an ingrate of the first type, the man who possesses this
fault for the reason that there is no fault that he does not possess,
a good man will give his benefit; for, if he were to eliminate all
such men, there would be no one to whom he could give.  To the ingrate
of the second type, the man who in the matter of benefits shows
himself a cheat, and has a natural bent in this direction, he will no
more give a benefit than he will lend money to a spendthrift, or
entrust a deposit to a man whom many have already found false.  There
is the man who is called timid because he is a fool; and because of
this he is classed with the bad men who are beset by all vices without
distinction and without exception.  But, strictly speaking, a timid
man is one who because of a natural weakness grows alarmed even at
unmeaning noises.  The fool possesses all vices, but he is not
inclined by nature to all; one man inclines to greed, another to
luxury, another to insolence.  Therefore it is a mistake for persons
to put such questions as these to the Stoics: "Tell me, is Achilles
timid?  Tell me, is Aristides, whose name stood for justice, unjust?
Tell me, is even Fabius, who retrieved the situation by his delays,"/a
rash?  Tell me, is Decius afraid of death?  Mucius a traitor?
Camillus a deserter?" We do not say that all men possess all vices in
the same way in which certain men display particular vices, but that
the bad and foolish man is not exempt from any vice; we do not acquit
even the bold man of fear, nor absolve even the spendthrift from
avarice.  Just as a man has all the five senses, and yet all men do
not for that reason have as keen sight as Lynceus/b so, if a man is a
fool, he does not possess all the vices in the same active and
vigorous form in which some persons possess some of them.  All the
vices exist in all men, yet not all are equally prominent in each
individual. This man's nature impels him to greed; this one is a
victim of wine, this one of lust, or, if he is not yet a victim, he is
so constituted that his natural impulses lead him in this direction.

And so, to return to my original proposition, everyone who is bad is
ungrateful, for he has in him all the seeds of wrongdoing; yet,
strictly speaking, the man who is termed ungrateful is one who has a
bent toward this vice.  To such a man, consequently, I shall not give
a benefit.  As a father who betroths his daughter to an overbearing
man who has been often divorced will disregard her best interests, as
he who entrusts the care of his patrimony to one who has been
condemned for the bad management of his affairs will be considered a
poor head of a household, as it will be the veriest madness for a man
to make a will naming as the guardian of his son one who is known to
be a robber of wards, so he will be counted the worst of benefactors
who chooses ungrateful persons in order to bestow upon them gifts that
are doomed to perish.  "Even the gods," you say, "confer many
blessings upon the ungrateful." But they designed them for the good;
yet the bad also share in them because they cannot be separated from
the others.  It is better, too, to benefit also the bad for the sake
of the good than to fail the good for the sake of the bad.  So the
blessings you cite - the day, the sun, the succession of summer and
winter and the intermediate seasons of spring and autumn with their
milder temperature, rains and springs to drink from, and winds that
blow in fixed season - these the gods have devised for the good of
all; they could not make an exception of individuals.  A king gives
honours to the worthy, but largesses even to the unworthy; the thief
no less than the perjurer and the adulterer and everyone, without
distinction of character, whose name appears on the register receives
grain from the state; whatever else a man may be, he gets his dole,
not because he is good; but because he is a citizen, and the good and
the bad share alike.  God also has given certain gifts to the whole
human race, and from these no man is shut out. For, while it was to
the common good that traffic in the sea should be open to all, and
that the kingdom of mankind should be enlarged, it was impossible to
cause the same wind to be favourable for the good and adverse for the
bad; nor was it possible to appoint a law for the fall of the rains in
order that they might not descend upon the fields of wicked and
dishonest men.  Certain blessings are offered to all.  Cities are
founded as much for the bad as for the good; works of genius, even if
they will fall into the hands of the unworthy, are published for
everybody; medicine points out its healing power even to criminals; no
one has banned the compounding of wholesome remedies for fear that
they may heal the unworthy.  In the case of the gifts that are
specifically bestowed because the recipient is worthy, apply the rule
of censorship and of rating the person, but not so in the case of
those that are open to the mob.  There is a great difference between
not excluding a man and choosing him.  Justice is vouchsafed even to
the thief; even murderers taste the blessings of peace; those who have
stolen the property of others even recover their own; assassins and
those who ply their swords on the city streets are protected from the
public enemy by the city wall; the laws shield with their protection
those who have sinned most against them.  There are certain blessings
that could not have fallen to a few unless they were given to all;
there is no need, therefore, for you to argue about the benefits to
which we have received a public invitation.  But that which must go to
a beneficiary of my own choosing will not be given to a man whom I
know to be ungrateful. xxx"Will vou, then," you ask, "neither give
counsel to an ungratefull man when he is perplexed, nor permit him to
have a drink of water, nor point out the path to him if he has lost
his way?  Or will you do all these services, and yet not be making a
gift?" Here I shall draw a distinction, or at least endeavour to do
so.  A benefit is a useful service, but not every useful service is a
benefit; for some services are too small to have the right to be
called benefits.  In order to produce a benefit, there must be a
combination of two conditions.  The first is the importance of the
service; for there are some that fall short of the dignity of the
claim.  Who ever called a morsel of bread a benefit, or tossing anyone
a copper, or enabling, him to get a light?  And sometimes these are
more helpful than very large gifts; yet, for all that, their cheapness
detracts from their value even when the necessity of the moment has
made them necessities.  A second condition, which is most important,
that must supplement the other, is that the motive of my action must
be the interest of the one for whom the benefit is destined, that I
should deem him worthy of it, should bestow it willingly and derive
pleasure from my gift; but none of those services of which we were
just speaking bears any of these marks, for we bestow them, not with
the thought that the recipients are worthy, but carelessly and as mere
trifles, and our gift is made, not so much to a man, as to humanity.
I shall not deny that sometimes I shall give even to the unworthy in
order to do honour to others; as, for instance, in the competition for
public office some of the most disreputable men are preferred to
others who are industrious, but of no family, by reason of their noble
birth, and not without reason.  For sacred is the memory of great
virtues, and more people find pleasure in being good, if the influence
of good men does not end with their lives.  To what did Cicero's son
owe the consulship if not to his father?  What recently took Cinna/a
from the camp of the enemy, and raised him to the consulship, what
Sextus Pompeius and the other Pompeii, unless it was the greatness of
one man, who once reached such a height that even his downfall
sufficed to exalt all his descendants?  What recently made Fabius
Persicus/b a priest in more than one college, a man whose kiss even
the shameless counted an insult?  What but a Verrucosus and an
Allobrogicus and the famous three hundred,/c who, to save their
country, blocked the invasion of the enemy with their single family?
This is the duty we owe to the virtuous - to honour them, not only
when they are present with us, but even when they have been taken from
our sight; as they have made it their aim, not to confine their
services to one age alone, but to leave behind their benefits even
after they themselves have passed away, so let us not confine our
gratitude to one age alone.  So-and-so was the father of great men:
whatever he may be, he is worthy of our benefits; he has given us
worthy sons.  So-and-so is descended from glorious ancestors: whatever
he may be, let him find refuge under the shadow of his ancestry.  As
filthy places become bright from the radiance of the sun, so let the
degenerate shine in the light of their forefathers.

At this point, Liberalis, I wish to offer a defence of the gods.  For
sometimes we are moved to say: "What could Providence mean by putting
on the throne an Arrhidaeus/a?" Was it to him, think you, that the
honour was accorded?  It was accorded to his father and to his
brother.  "Why did it make Gaius Caesar the ruler of the world? - a
man so greedy of human blood that he ordered it to be shed in his
presence as freely as if he intended to catch the stream in his
mouth!" But tell me, do you think that it was to him this was
accorded? It was accorded to his father Germanicus, to his grandfather
and to his great- grandfather, and to others before them, men who were
no less glorious, even if they passed their lives as private citizens
on a footing of equality with others.  Why, when you yourself were
supporting Mamercus Scaurus/b for the consulship, were you not aware
that he would try to catch in his open mouth the menstrual discharge
of his own maidservants?  Did he himself make any mystery of it?  Did
he wish to appear to be decent?  I will repeat to you a story that he
told on himself - it went the rounds, I recall, and was recounted in
his presence.  To Annius Pollio who was lying down he had proposed,
using an obscene word, an act that he was more ready to submit to, and
when he saw Pollio frown, he added; "If there is anything bad in what
I have said, may it fall upon me and my head!" This story he used to
tell against himself.  Is it this man, so openly obscene, that you
have admitted to the fasces and the tribunal?  Of course it was while
you were thinking of the great old Scaurus,/c who was president of the
senate, and chafing to see his offspring obscure!

The gods, it is probable, act in the same manner--some are treated
with more indulgence because of their parents and ancestors, others
because of their grandchildren and great- grandchildren and the long
line of their descendants, whose qualities are as yet unrevealed; for
the gods know well the complete evolution of their work, and the
knowledge of all that will hereafter pass through their hands is
always to them clearly revealed.  The events that appear suddenly to
us out of the unkdown, and all that we count unexpected are to them
familiar happenings, long foreseen. {Pope+}

God says Let these men be kings {Divine_Right+} because their
forefathers have not been, because they have regarded justice and
unselfishness as their highest authority, because, instead of
sacrificing the state to themselves, they have sacrificed themselves
to the state.{Civic_Duty+} Let these others reign, because some one of
their grandsires before them was a good man who displayed a soul
superior to Fortune, who, in times of civil strife, preferred to be
conquered than to conquer, because in this way he could serve the
interest of the state.  Despite the long lapse of time, it has not
been possible to pay to him the debt of gratitude; out of regard for
him, now let this other rule over the people, not because he has the
knowledge or the ability, but because another has served in his place.
This one/a is deformed in body, hideous in aspect, and will bring
ridicule upon the insignia of his office; then men will blame me, they
will say that I am blind and rash, that I little know what disposition
I am making of honours that are due to none but the greatest and
loftiest of men; yet I am well aware that I am making this gift to one
man, and thereby paying an ancient debt to another.  How can these
critics know that hero of old, who persistently fled from the glory
that followed him, who, going into danger, had the air that others
show when they return from danger, who never separated his own
interest from that of the state? 'Where,' you ask, 'is this man, or
who is he?' But how could you know these things?  It is for me to
balance the debits and credits of such accounts, I know what and to
whom I owe. Some I repay after a long term, others in advance, and
according as opportunity and the resources of my governance permit."
Consequently, I, too, shall sometimes bestow certain gifts on an
ungrateful man, but not because of the man himself.

"Tell me," you say, "if you do not know whether a man is grateful or
ungrateful, will you wait until you do know, or will you refuse to
lose the opportunity of giving a benefit?  To wait is a long matter, -
for, as Plato says, the human heart is hard to divine, - not to wait
hazardous." Our answer to this will be that we never wait for absolute
certainty, since the discovery of truth is difficult, but follow the
path that probable truth shows.  All the business of life proceeds in
this way. It is thus that we sow, that we sail the sea, that we serve
in the army, that we take wives, that we rear children ; since in all
these actions the issue is uncertain, we follow the course that we
believe offers the hope of success.  For who will promise to the sower
a harvest, to the sailor a port, to the soldier a victory, to a
husband a chaste wife, to a father dutiful children?  We follow, not
where truth, but where reason, directs us.  If you wait to do only
what is assured of success and to have only the knowledge that comes
from ascertained truth, all activity is given up, and life comes to a
halt.  Since it is, not truth, but the probable truth, that impels me
in one direction or another, I shall give my benefit to the man who in
all probability will be grateful.

"Many circumstances," you say, "will arise that will enable a bad man
to steal into the place of a good one, and the good man will lose
favour instead of the bad one; for appearances are deceptive, and it
is these we trust." Who denies it?  Yet I find nothing else from which
to form an opinion.  These are the footprints I must follow in my
search for truth, I have nothing that is more trustworthy; I shall
take pains to consider these with all possible care, and shall not be
hasty in granting my assent.  For the same thing may happen in battle,
and my hand, deceived by some mistake, may direct my weapon against a
comrade, and spare an enemy as though he were a friend; but this will
happen but rarely, and from no fault of my own, for my intention is to
smite the enemy, and to defend my countryman.  If I know that a man is
ungrateful, I shall not give him a benefit.  Yet if he has tricked me,
if he has imposed upon me, no blame attaches to the giver because I
made the gift supposing that the man would be grateful.

"Suppose," you say, "that you have promised to give a benefit, and
later have discovered that the man is ungrateful, will you or will you
not bestow it?  If you do so knowinlylv you do wrong, for you give to
one to whom vou ought not to give; if you refuse, you likewise do
wrong - you do not give to one to whom you promised to give.  This
case would upset your conscience and your proud assurance that the
wise man never regrets his action, or amends what he has done, or
changes his purpose." The wise man does not change his purpose if the
situation remains as it was when he formed it; he is never filled with
regret because at the time nothing better could have been done than
was done, no better decision could have been made than was made; yet
all that he undertakes is subject to the reservation: "If nothing
happens to prevent." If we say that all his plans prosper, and that
nothing happens contrary to his expectation, it is because he has
presupposed that something might happen to thwart his designs.  It is
the imprudent man who is confident that Fortune is plighted to
himself; the wise man envisages her in both of her aspects; he knows
how great is the chance of mistake, how uncertain are human affairs,
how many obstacles block the success of our plans; he follows alert
the doubtful and slippery course of chance, weighs uncertain outcome
against his certainty of purpose.  But the reservation without which
he makes no plan, undertakes nothing, protects him here also.  I have
promised a benefit in case nothing occurs to show that I ought not to
give it.  For what if my country should bid me give to her what I have
promised to another?  What if a law should be passed, forbidding
anyone to do what I had promised that I would do for my friend?
Suppose I have promised you my daughter in marriage, but find out
later that you are not a citizen; I have no right to contract a
marriage with a foreigner; the same circumstance that forbids it
provides my defence.  Only then shall I be breaking faith, only then
shall I listen to a charge of inconstancy, if I fail to fulfil a
promise though all the circumstances remain the same as they were when
I made my promise; otherwise, any chance that takes place gives me the
liberty of revising my decision, and frees me from my pledge.  Suppose
I have promised my legal assistance, but afterwards discover that a
precedent was being sought from that case to harm my father; suppose I
have promised that I will go abroad, but word is brought that the way
is beset with robbers; suppose I was about to go to keep an
appointment, but am detained by the illness of my son or by my wife's
confinement.  If you are to hold me to the fulfilment of my promise+
all the circumstances must remain the same as they were when I
promised; but what greater change can there be than my discovery that
you are a bad and ungrateful man?  I shall refuse to an unworthy man
what I was willing to give to him supposing him to be worthy, and I
shall even have reason to be angry because I was deceived.

Nevertheless I shall also examine into the value of the gift in
question; for the amount of the sum promised will help my decision.
If it is a trifle, I shall give it to you, not because you deserve it,
but because I have promised, and I shall not count it as a gift, but
shall keep my word, and give my ear a twitch.  I shall punish my
rashness in promising by suffering loss: "You see how sorry you are
for yourself; next time take more care before you speak!" As the
saying is, I shall pay for my tongue.  If the amount is a larger one,
"I shall not," as Maecenas puts it, "let my punishment cost me ten
million sesterces." For I shall match the two sides of the question
one against the other. There is something in abiding by what you have
promised; on the other hand, there is much in the principle of not
bestowing a benefit on one who is unworthy.  Yet how great is this
benefit?  If it is a slight one, let us wink at it; if, however, it is
likely to cause me either great loss or shame, should rather excuse
myself once for having refused it than ever afterward for having given
it.  It all depends, I say, upon how much value I attach to the letter
of my promise.  I shall not only keep back what I have rashly
promised, but shall demand back what I have wrongly given.  The man is
mad who keeps a promise that was a mistake.

Philip, king of the Macedonians, had a soldier who was a valiant
fighter, and, having found his services useful in many campaigns, he
had from time to time presented him with some of the booty as a reward
for his prowess, and, by his repeated bounties, was exciting the venal
spirit of the man.  Once after being shipwrecked he was cast ashore
upon the estate of a certain Macedonian; this one, when he heard the
news, rushed to his help, resuscitated his breath, brought him to his
farmhouse, surrendered to him his bed, restored him from a weak and
half- dead condition to new life, cared for him for thirty days at his
own expense, put him upon his feet, provided him with money for his
journey, and heard him say over and over: "I will; how you my
gratitude if only I have the good fortune to see my commander." To
Philip he gave an account of his shipwreck, but said nothing of the
help he had received, and promptly asked Philip to present him with a
certain man's estate.  The man was, in fact, his host, the very one
who had rescued him, who had restored him to health.  Kings sometimes,
especially in time of war, make many gifts with their eyes
closed. "One just man is no match for so many armed men fired with
greed, it is not possible for any mortal to be a good man and a good
general at the same time.  How will he satiate so many thousands of
insatiable men?  What will they have if every man has only what is his
own?  So Philip communed with himself as he gave order that the
soldier should be put in possession of the property he asked for.  The
other, however, when he was expelled from his property, did not, like
a peasant, endure his wrong in silence, thankful that he himself had
not been included in the present, but wrote a concise and outspoken
letter to Philip.  Upon receiving this, Philip was so enraged that he
immediately ordered Pausanias/a to restore the property to its former
owner, and, besides, to brand that most dishonourable of soldiers,
most ungrateful of guests, most greedy of shipwrecked men with letters
showing him to be an ungrateful person.  He, indeed, deserved, not
merely to be branded with those letters, but to have them carved in
his flesh - a man who had cast out his own host to lie like a naked
and shipwrecked sailor upon that shore on which he himself had lain.
But we shall heed within what limits the punishment ought to be kept;
he had, in any case, to be deprived of what he had seized with the
utmost villainy.  Yet who would be moved by his punishment?  He had
committed a crime which could stir no pitiful heart to pity him.

Will a Philip give to you because he promised, even at the price of
sacrificing duty, even at the price of committing an injustice, even
at the price of committing a crime, even at the price of closing all
shores/b to the shipwrecked by this one act?  There is no fickleness
in leaving a wrong course when it has been recognized as such and
condemned, and we must confess frankly: "I thought it was different, I
have been deceived." It is but the stubbornness of foolish pride to
declare: "What I have once said, be it what it may, shall remain fixed
and unaltered." There is nothing wrong in changing a plan when the
situation is changed.  Tell me, if Philip had left the soldier in
possession of the shores that he had obtained by shipwreck, is it not
true that he would thereby have cut off all unfortunates from fire and
water/a?  "Rather do you," he said, "within the bounds of my kingdom
carry everywhere upon your most brazen brow these letters that ought
to be stamped upon all men's eyes.  Go, show how sacred a thing is the
table of hospitality; display upon your countenance that decree, for
all to read, which keeps it from being a capital crime to shelter the
unfortunate beneath one's roof!  This ordinance will thus have more
authority than if I had engraved it upon bronze." "Why, then," you
say, "did your master Zeno, when he had promised a loan of five
hundred denarii to a man, and had himself discovered that he was an
altogether unsuitable person, persist in making the loan because he
had promised it, although his friends advised him not to give it?" In
the first place, one set of terms applies to a loan, another to a
benefit.  It is possible to recall money even if it has been badly
placed; I can summon a debtor to pay on a given date, and, if he has
gone bankrupt, I shall get my share; but a benefit is lost wholly and
immediately. Besides, the one is the act of a bad man, the other of a
bad manager.  Again, if the sum had been a larger one, not even Zeno
would have persisted in lending it.  It was only five hundred denarii,
- an amount, as we say, "one can spend on an illness," - and not to
break his promise+ was worth that much.  I will go out to dinner
because I have promised, even if the weather is cold; but not so if
there is a snowstorm.  I will rise from my table because I have
promised to attend a betrothal, although I have not digested my food;
but not so if I shall have a fever. I will go down to the forum in
order to go bail for you because I have promised; but not so if you
ask me to go bail for an uncertain amount, if you place me under
obligation to the treasury./a There is understood, I say, the
unexpressed reservations: "If I can, if I ought,if things remain
so-and- so."  When you exact fulfilment, see to it that the situation
is the same as it was when I promised; then, if I fail, I shall be
guilty of fickleness.  If something new has happened, why are you
surprised that my intention has changed, since conditions have changed
since I promised? Put everything back as it was, and I shall be as I
was.  We promise to appear in court, yet not all are liable to
prosecution if they default - a major necessity excuses the
defaulter. {promises+}

To the further question of whether in every case we ought to show
gratitude, and whether a benefit ought in all cases to be returned,
consider that I make the same reply.  It is my duty to show a grateful
heart, but sometimes my own ill fortune, sometimes the good fortune of
the one to whom I am indebted, will not permit me to show
gratitude. For what return can I make to a king, what to a rich man if
I am poor, particularly since some men regard it as an ijustice to
have their benefit returned, and are continually piling benefits upon
benefits?  In the case of such persons, what more can I do than have
the desire?  Nor, indeed, ought I to refuse a fresh benefit simply
because I have not yet repaid an earlier one.  I shall accept it as
willingly as it is given, and I shall allow my friend to find in me an
ample opportunity for exercising his goodness.  He who is unwilling to
accept new benefits must resent those already received.  I may not
testify my gratitude - but what does it matter?  I am not responsible
for the delay if I lack either the opportunity or the means.  He of
course, had both the opportunity and the means when he bestowed his
benefit upon me.  Is he a good man or a bad man?  Before a good judge
I have a good case; before a bad one I do not plead my case.  Nor do I
think that we ought to do this either - to hasten to show gratitude
even against the will of those to whom we show it, and to press it
upon them although they draw back.  It is not displaying gratitude to
repay something that you have willingly accepted to someone who is
unwilling to accept it.  Some people, when a trifling gift has been
sent to them, forthwith, quite unseasonably, send back another, and
then declare that they are under no obligation; but to send something
back at once, and to wipe out a gift with a gift is almost a repulse.
Sometimes, too, I shall not return a benefit although I am able.
When?  When I myself shall lose more than the other will gain, when he
will not be aware of any increase of his store in taking back that
which will cause me great loss by being returned.  He who hastens at
all odds to make return shows the feeling, not of a person that is
grateful, but of a debtor.  And, to put it briefly, he who is too
eager to pay his debt is unwilling to be indebted, and he who is
unwilling to be indebted is ungrateful.

BOOK V

I thought that I had finished my task in the preceding books, having
discussed there how a benefit ought to be given, and how it ought to
be received; for these two points are the boundary marks of this
particular service.  In any further inquiry, I shall be, not serving,
but indulging, my subject, the only demand of which is that I follow
whither it leads, not whither it allures; for now and then a
suggestion will be born that challenges the mind by a certain charm,
yet remains, if not a useless, an unnecessary addition.  Since,
however, such is your wish, having finished with the matters that
bound the subject, let us continue to examine further those that, if I
must tell the truth, are associated with it, yet are not actually
connected; whoever examines these carefully will neither be repaid for
his pains nor yet wholly waste his pains.

To you, however, Aebutius Liberalis, who are naturally the best of men
and prone to benefits, no laudation of them seems to be adequate.
Never have I seen anyone who was so generous in his estimate of even
the most trivial services; your goodness has reached such a degree
that, when any man is given a benefit, you count it as given to
yourself; in order that no one may regret the bestowal of a benefit,
you are ready to pay the debts of the ungrateful.  So far removed are
you yourself from all boasting, so eager at once to free those whom
you place under obligation from the burden of it, that, in making a
gift to anyone, you wish to appear, not to be bestowing, but to be
returning, one; and so all that is given in this manner will be
returned to you in richer measure.  For benefits usually pursue the
man who asks no return, and just as glory is more apt to pursue those
who flee from it, so those who are willing to allow men to be
ungrateful reap a more grateful return for the benefits they have
given them.  Truly, so far as you are concerned, there is nothing to
prevent those who have received benefits from boldly repeating their
request, nor will you refuse to confer others, and to add more and
greater benefits to those that have been covert and concealed -
excellent man that you are and a truly great soul, your aim is to bear
with an ungrateful man so long that he will in the end become
grateful.  Nor will your method deceive you; vices will yield to
virtue if you do not hasten too quickly to hate them.  In any case the
precept that it is disgraceful to be outdone in bestowing benefits+
gives you unique pleasure as being a glorious utterance.  Whether this
is true or not is often rightly questioned, and the case is quite
different from what you imagine.  For it is never disgraceful to be
worsted in a struggle for something honourable, provided that you do
not throw down your arms, and that, even when conquered, you still
wish to conquer.  Not all bring the same strength to the
accomplishment of a good purpose, nor the same resources, nor the same
favour of Fortune, which modifies at all events the issues of even the
best plans; praise should be awarded to the very desire that strives
in the right direction even though another by his swifter pace
outstrips it.  It is not as in the contests provided as a public
spectacle, where the palm declares which is the better contestant,
although even in these chance often gives the preference to the poorer
man.  When the object of the struggle is a service which both on their
part are eager to make as great as possible, if one of the two has had
greater power, and has had at hand ample resources to accomplish his
purpose, if Fortune permits him to attain all that he has attempted,
while the other matches him only in desire - even if the latter has
returned smaller gifts than he received, or, has not returned all, but
wishes to make return, and strives with his whole soul to do so, he is
no more conquered than is the soldier who dies in arms, whom the enemy
could more easily kill than turn from his purpose. You are counting it
a disgrace to be conquered, but that cannot possibly happen to a good
man.  For he will never surrender, he will never give up; to the last
day of his life he will stand prepared, and in that posture will die,
proud of having received great gifts and of having desired to repay
them.

The Lacedaemonians forbid their young men to contend in the
pancratium/a or with the caestus, where the weaker contestant is shown
by his own admission that he has been conquered.  A runner wins by
being the first to reach the chalk-line; he surpasses his opponent,
not in pluck but in speed.  A wrestler who has been thrown three
times, though he does not surrender the palm, loses it.  Since the
Lacedaemonians thought it highly important to have their citizens
invincible, they kept them out of those contests in which the victor
is determined, not by a judge, or purely by the outcome itself, but by
the cry of the vanquished proclaiming surrender., This quality of
never being conquered, which the Lacedaemonians safeguard for their
citizens, is bestowed on all men by virtue and virtuous desire, since
the spirit is unconquered even in the midst of defeat.  For this
reason no one speaks of the three hundred Fabii as conquered, but
slaughtered; and Regulus was captured by the Carthaginians, not
conquered, nor is any other man who, though overwhelmed by the
strength and weight of angry Fortune, does not yield in spirit.  The
same is true of benefits. A man may have received more than he gave,
greater ones, more frequent ones, yet, for all that, he has not been
conquered.  If you reckon those that you have given over against those
that you have received, it is true, perhaps, that benefits are
surpassed by benefits; but, if you match the giver against the
recipient, taking into consideration, as you must, their intentions in
themselves, the palm will belong to neither.  For, even when one
combatant has been pierced by many wounds, while the other has been
but slightly wounded, it is customary to say that they left the arena
evenly matched, although it is evident that one of them is the weaker
man. xxx No one, therefore, can be outdone in benefits if he knows how
to owe a debt, if he desires to make return - if he matches his
benefactor in spirit, even though he cannot match him in deeds.  So
long as he continues in this state of mind, so long as he holds the
desire to give proof of a grateful heart, what difference does it make
on which side the greater number of gifts is reckoned?  You are able
to give much, and I am able only to receive; on your side stands good
fortune, on my side good desire; yet I am as much your peer as naked
or lightly armed soldiers are the peers of the many who are fully
armed.  No one, therefore, is outdone in benefits because each man's
gratitude is to be measured by his desire.  For, if it is disgraceful
to be outdone in benefits it is not right to accept a benefit from
most powerful men whose kindness you are unable to return - I mean
princes and kings, who have been placed by Fortune in a position that
enables them to bestow many gifts, and are likely to receive very few
and very inadequate returns for what they have given.  I have spoken
of kings and princes, to whom, nevertheless, it is possible for us to
render assistance, and whose preeminent power rests upon the consent
and service of their inferiors. But there are some men who, withdrawn
beyond.the reach of every lust, are scarcely touched at all by any
human desires; upon whom Fortune herself has nothing that she can
bestow.  In benefits I must of necessity be outdone by Socrates, of
necessity by Diogenes,/a who marchea naked through the midst of the
treasures of the Macedonians, treading under foot the wealth of kings.
O! in very truth, how rightly did he seem then, both to himself and to
all others who had not been rendered blind to the perception of truth,
to tower above the man beneath whose feet lay the whole world!  Far
more powerful, far richer was he than Alexander, who then was master
of the whole world; for what Diogenes refused to receive was even more
than Alexander was able to give. {poor_is_rich+}

It is not disgraceful to be outdone by such as these for it is not
proved that I am the less brave if you pit me against an enemy that is
invulnerable, nor that fire is the less able to burn if it falls upon
a substance that flames cannot harm, nor that iron has lost its power
of cutting if it attempts to cleave stone that is solid, impervious to
a blow, and by its very nature invincible to hard instruments.  In
regard to the grateful man I would answer you in the same way.  He is
not disgracefully outdone in benefits if he has become indebted to
those whose exalted station or exceeding merit blocks the approach to
any benefits that might return to them.  Our parents almost always
outdo us.  For, so long as we count them severe, so long as we fail to
understand the benefits they give us, we have them with us.  When at
last with age we have acquired some wisdom, and it begins to be
evident that we ought to love them for the very things that kept us
from loving them - their admonitions, their strictness, and their
careful watch over our heedless youth - they are snatched from us. Few
reach the age when they can reap some true reward from their children;
the rest are aware of their sons by their burden.  Yet there is no
disgrace in being outdone in benefits by a parent; how should there
be, seeing that there is no disgrace in being outdone by anyone?  For
there are some men to whom we are both equal and unequal - equal in
intention, which is all that they require, unequal in fortune, and, if
it is this that prevents anyone from repaying a favour, he has no need
to blush on the ground that he has been outdone.  It is no disgrace to
fail to attain provided you keep striving.  Very often it is necessary
to ask for new benefits before we have returned older ones, and yet we
do not fail to ask for them or feel any disgrace because we shall be
indebted for them with no prospect of returning them, for, if we are
prevented from showing ourselves most grateful, it will be the fault,
not of ourselves, but of something from without that intervenes and
deters us.  Yet in intention we shall not be outdone, nor shall we be
disgraced if we are overpowered by things that are beyond our
control. Alexander, king of the Macedonians, used to boast that no one
had outdone him in benefits.  But there is no reason why, in the
excess of his pride, he should look up to the Macedonians and the
Greeks and the Carians and the Persians and the other nations who were
enrolled in his army, nor suppose that it was their benefit that had
bestowed upon him a kingdom that extended from a corner of Thrace to
the shore of the unknown sea!  Socrates could have had the same reason
to boast, and Diogenes the same reason, by whom, in any case, he was
outdone.  Why was he not outdone on that day when, puffed up as he was
beyond the limits of human pride, he saw someone to whom he could give
nothing, from whom he could take nothing away?

King Archelaus once invited Socrates to come to him.  But Socrates is
said to have replied that he was not willing to go to him in order
that he might receive benefits from him, since he would be unable to
make adequate return for them.  Yet, in the first place, he was at
liberty to refuse to accept them; in the second place, he would have
anticipated him in bestowing a benefit, for he would have come because
he was invited, and would, at any rate, have given something for which
Archelaus could have made no return to Socrates.  Furthermore, if
Archelaus was going to give to him gold and silver, and was going to
receive in return only a scorn for gold and silver, could not Socrates
have repaid Archelaus with his thanks?  And what could he have
received that would have had the value of what he gave if he had
revealed to Archelaus a man who was skilled in the knowledge of life
and of death, and comprehended the ends of both? If he had admitted
into the secrets of Nature one who even in broad daylight had lost his
way - a king, so ignorant of her ways that one day, when there was an
eclipse of the sun, he shut up his palace, and, as is customary in
times of grief and disaster, sheared his son's hair/a?  How great a
benefit it would have been if Socrates had dragged the frightened king
from his hiding-place, and bidden him be of good cheer, saying: "This
does not mean the disappearance of the sun, but that two heavenly
bodies are in conjunction by reason of the fact that the moon, which
travels by a lower path has placed her disk exactly beneath the sun
itself, and has hidden it by interposing her own body.  Sometimes, if
she just grazes the sun in passing, she veils only a small portion of
it; sometimes, if she thrusts the greater part of her body in front of
it, she conceals a larger portion; sometimes, if, being between the
earth and the sun, she reaches a point where the three bodies are in a
straight line, she shuts off completely the sight of the sun.  But
soon their own speed will draw these heavenly bodies apart, one to
this position, the other to that; soon the earth will recover the
light of day.  And this order Will continue throughout the ages. and
has its appointed days, that are known beforehand, on which the sun is
prevented from sending forth all his rays because of the intervention
of the moon.  Wait just a little while; soon he will emerge, soon he
will leave behind this seeming cloud, soon he will be rid of all
obstructions, and will freely send forth his light." Could not
Socrates have made adequate return to Archelaus for his favour if he
had forbidden him to be king/a?  Assuredly the benefit he received
from Socrates would have been too small if it had been possible for
him to bestow any benefit on Socrates!  Why, then, did Socrates says
this?  Being a clever person, who was given to talking in parables, a
mocker of all, especially of the great, he preferred to couch his
refusal in irony rather than in stubbornness or pride; he said that he
was not willing to receive benefits from one to whom he could not make
adequate return.  Perhaps he feared that he might be forced to accept
gifts that he did not wish, that he might be forced to accept
something unworthy of Socrates.  Someone will say: "He could have
refused it if he wished." But he would have made an enemy of the king,
who was arrogant, and wished all his favours to be highly valued.
Whether you are unwilling to give something to a king, or to accept
something from a king is of no consequence; both alike are in his eyes
a rebuff, and to be treated with scorn is more bitter to a proud
spirit than not to be feared.  Would you like to know what Socrates
really meant? He meant that the man whose freedom of speech even a
free state could not endure declined to enter into voluntary
servitude!

But I think that we have sufficiently discussed this topic of whether
it is disgraceful to be outdone in benefits.  Whoever raises the
question must know that men are not in the habit of bestowing benefits
upon themselves; for it would have been evident that there is no
disgrace in a man's being outdone by himself.  Yet among certain
Stoics it is even debated whether it is possible for a man to bestow a
benefit on himself, whether it is his duty to return gratitude to
himself.  The reason why it seemed necessary to raise the question was
our habitual use of such expressions as: "I am thankful to myself," "I
can blame no one but myself," "I am angry with myself," "I shall exact
punishment from myself," "I hate myself" and, many others of the same
sort in which one speaks of oneself as if another person.  "If," they
say, "I am able to injure myself, why should I not be able, also to
bestow a benefit on myself?  Moreover, why should not things that
would be called benefits if I had bestowed them on another still be
benefits if I have bestowed them on myself?  Why should not something
that would have placed me in debt if I had received it from another
still place me in debt if I have given it to myself?  Why should I be
ungrateful to myself, which is just as disgraceful as to be niggardly
to oneself and harsh and cruel to oneself and neglectful of oneself?
The reputation of a pimp is equally bad whether he prostitutes himself
or another.  The flatterer, the man who subscribes to the words of
another, and is ready to applaud falsehoods, is of course open to
censure; and not less so is the man who is pleased with himself, who,
so to speak, looks up to himself, and is his own flatterer.  The vices
are hateful, not only when they are outwardly expressed, but when they
are turned in upon themselves.  Whom will you more admire than the man
who governs himself, who has himself under control? It is easier to
rule savage nations, impatient as they are of the authority of others,
than to restrain one's own spirit and submit to selfcontrol. Plato,
say they, was grateful to Socrates be- cause he learned from him; why
should not Socrates be grateful to himself because he taught himself?
Marcus Cato says: 'Borrow from yourself whatever you lack.' If I am
able to lend to myself, why should I not be able to give to myself?
The instances in which habit leads us to divide ourselves into two
persons are countless; we are prone to say: 'Let me converse with
myself,' and, 'I will give my ear a twitch.'/a If there is any truth
in these expressions, just as a man ought to be angry with himself, so
he ought to render thanks to himself; as he ought to reprove himself,
so also he ought to praise himself; as he can cause himself loss, so
also he can bring himself gain.  Injury and benefit are the converse
of each other; if we say of anyone: 'He has done himself an injury,'
we may also say: 'He has bestowed upon himself a benefit.'" Nature's
rule is that a man should first become a debtor, and then should
return gratitude; there cannot be a debtor without a creditor any more
than there can be a husband without a wife, - or a father without a
son; someone must give in order that someone may receive.  To transfer
something from the left hand to the right hand is neither to give nor
to receive.  Just as no one carries himself although he moves and
transports his body, as no one, although he has spoken in his own
defence, is said to have appeared as his own advocate, or erects a
statue to himself as his own patron, as no sick man, when he has
regained health by treating himself, demands from himself a fee, so in
transactions of every sort - even though he may have done something
that has been to his advantage, yet he will be under no obligation to
return gratitude to himself because he will not find any person to
whom he can return it.  Though I grant that a man may bestow a benefit
on himself, yet at the same time that he gives it, he also receives a
return; though I grant that a man may receive a benefit from himself,
yet at the same time that he receives it, he returns it.  "You
borrow," as they say, "from your own pocket," and, just as if it were
a game, the item immediately shifts to the other side/a; for the giver
and the receiver are not to be differentiated, but are one and the
same person.  The word "owe" has no place unless two persons are
involved; how, then, will it apply to one person, who, in the act of
incurring a debt, frees himself from it?  In a disk or a sphere there
is no bottom, no top, no end, no beginning, because as the object is
moved, the relations change, and the part that was behind now
precedes, and the part that was going down now comes up, yet all, in
whatever direction they may move, come back to the same
position. Imagine that the same principle applies in the case of a
man; though you may transform him into many different characters, he
remains a simple human being.  He strikes himself - there is no one
whom he may charge with doing him an injury.  He binds himself and
locks himself up - he is not held for damages.  He bestows a benefit
on himself - he has forthwith made return to the giver.

In the realm of Nature, it is said, there is never any loss, for
whatever is taken out of it, returns to it, and nothing is able to
perish, because there is no place into which it can escape, but
everything returns to whence it came.  "What is the bearing," you ask,
"of this illustration on the question that is before us?" I will tell
you.  Suppose that you are un- grateful - the benefit is not lost, for
the one who bestowed it still has it, Suppose that you are unwilling
to receive a return - it is already in your possession before it is
returned.  You are not able to lose anything, because what is
withdrawn from you is none the less acquired by you.  The operation
proceeds in a circle within yourself - in receiving you give, in
giving you receive.

"One ought," you say, "to bestow benefit on oneself; therefore one
ought also to return gratitude to oneself." But the first proposition,
on which the conclusion depends, is false; for no one bestows benefit
on himself, but a man simply obeys a natural instinct that disposes
him to show affection for himself, and it is this that causes him to
take the utmost pains to avoid what is hurtful, and to seek what is
beneficial.  Consequently, the man who gives to himself is not
generous, nor is he who pardons himself merciful, nor he who is
touched by his own misfortunes pitiful.  For generosity, mercy, and
pity contribute to others; natural instinct contributes to oneself.  A
benefit is a voluntary act, but self-interest is a law of nature.  The
more benefits a man bestows, the more beneficent he becomes; but who
was ever praised for having been of service to himself? for having
rescued himself from brigands?  No one any more bestows a benefit upon
himself than he does hospitality; no one any more gives to himself
than he lends to himself.

If every man does bestow benefits on himself, if he is always
bestowing them, and bestows them without cessation, it will be
impossible for him to reckon the number of his benefits.  When, then,
will he be able to return gratitude, since, by the act of returning
gratitude, he will be giving a benefit?  For how will you be able to
tell whether he is giving, or returning, a benefit to himself, since
the transactions take place within one and the same man? I have freed
myself from peril - I have, then, bestowed a benefit upon myself.  I
free myself from peril a second time - am I, then, giving, or
returning, a benefit to myself?

Again, although I should grant the first proposition, that we do
bestow benefit upon ourselves, I shall not grant the conclusion that
is drawn from it; for even if we give, we owe nothing.  Why? because
we immediately receive a return.  I ought, properly, to receive a
benefit, then be indebted, then repay; but there is no opportunity
here to be indebted, for we receive a return without any delay.  No
one really gives except to another, no one owes except to another, no
one return's except to another. An act that so often requires two
persons cannot be performed within the limits of one.

A benefit is the contribution of something useful but "contribution"
implies the existence of others.  If a man says that he has sold
something to himself, will he not be thought mad?  For selling means
alienation, the transferring of one's property and one's right in it
to another.  Yet, just as is the case in selling, giving implies the
relinquishment of something, the surrendering of something that you
have held to the possession of another.  And if this is so, no one has
ever bestowed a benefit upon himself because no one can "give" to
himself; otherwise two opposites are combined in one act, so that
giving and receiving are the same thing.  Yet there is a great
difference between giving and receiving; why should there not be,
since these words are applied to exactly opposite actions?  Yet, if
anyone can give a benefit to himself, there is no difference between
giving and receiving.  I said a little while ago that certain words
imply the existence of other persons, and are of such fashion that
their whole meaning is directed away from ourselves.  I am a brother,
but of another, for no one can be his own brother; I am an equal, but
of someone else, for can any man be the equal of himself?  Unless
there are two objects, comparison is unintelligible; unless there are
two objects, there can be no coupling; so also, unless there are two
persons, there can be no giving, and, unless there are two persons,
there can be no benefaction. This is clear from the very expression,
"to do good to," by which the act is defined; but no one any more does
good to himself than he befriends himself, or belongs to his own
party.  I might pursue this theme further, and multiply examples.  Of
course, since benefaction must be included among those acts that
require a second person.  Certain actions, though honourable,
admirable, and highly virtuous, find a field only in the person of
another. Fidelity is praised, and honoured as one of the greatest
blessings of the human race, yet is it ever said that anyone for that
reason has kept his promise to himself?

I come now to the last part of the subject. He who returns gratitude
ought to expend something, just as he who pays a debt expends money;
but he who returns gratitude to himself expends nothing, just as
surely as he who has received a benefit from himself gains nothing. A
benefit and the repayment of gratitude must pass from one to the
other; no interchange is possible if only one person is involved.  He
who returns gratitude does good in his turn to the one from whom he
obtained something.  But he who returns gratitude to himself - to whom
does he do good?  Only to himself.  And who does not think of the
repayment of gratitude as one act, and the bestowal of a benefit as
another? He who returns gratitude to himself does good to himself.
And what ingrate was ever unwilling to do this?  Nay, rather, who was
ever an ingrate except that he might do this?  "If," you say, "we
ought to render thanks to ourselves, we ought also to return
gratitude; yet we say: 'I am thankful to myself that I refused to
marry that woman,' and 'that I did not conclude a partnership with
that man.' "But when we say this, we are lauding ourselves, and, in
order to show approval of our act, we misapply the language of those
who render thanks.  A benefit is something which, when given, May, or
may not, be returned.  Now he who gives a benefit to himself cannot
help having what he has given returned; therefore this is not a
benefit.  A benefit is received at one time, is returned at another./a
A benefit, too, possesses this commendable, this most praiseworthy,
quality, that a man forgets for the time being his own interest in
order that he may give help to another, that he is ready to deprive
himself of what he gives to another.  But he who gives a benefit to
himself does not do this.  The giving of a benefit is a social act, it
wins the goodwill of someone, it lays someone under obligation; giving
to oneself is not a social act, it wins no one's goodwill, it lays no
one under obligation, it raises no man's hopes, or leads him to say:
"I must cultivate this man; he has given a benefit to So-and-so, he
will give one to me also." A benefit is something that a man gives,
not for his own sake, but for the sake of the one to whom he is
giving.  But he who gives a benefit to himself gives for his own sake;
this, then, is not a benefit.

I seem to you now to have been false to the claim that I made at the
beginning.  For you say that I am far from doing anything worth while
- nay, that, in honest truth, I am wasting all my trouble.  But wait,
and you will soon say this with more truth after I have led you into
such obscurities that, even when you have found your way out, you will
have accomplished nothing more than escape from difficulties into
which you need never have plunged.  For what is the good of
laboriously untying knots which you yourself have made in order that
you might untie them?  But, just as it provides amusement and sport
when certain objects are knotted up in such a way that an unskilled
person has difficulty in unloosing them, while they yield without any
trouble to the one who tied the knots because he knows the loops and
the snarls, and nevertheless the problem affords some pleasure, for it
tests sharpness of wits and provokes mental effort, so these matters,
which seem cunning and tricky, banish indifference and sloth from our
minds, which, at one time, should find a level field in which to
wander, and, at another, should encounter a dark and uneven stretch,
through which we must merely creep, and place every footstep with
care.  Some argue that no man is ungrateful, and support the statement
as follows: "a benefit is that which does good; but, according to you
Stoics, no one is able to do good to a bad man; therefore a bad man
does not receive a benefit, <therefore he> is <not> ungrateful.
xxx"Furthermore, you say, a benefit is an honourable and commendable
act; but no honourable and commendable act has place in a bad man,
therefore neither has a benefit; and, if he cannot receive one,
neither ought he to return one, and, therefore, he does not become
ungrateful.

"Furthermore, according to you, a good man always acts rightly; but,
if he always acts rightly, he cannot be ungrateful. No one is able to
give a benefit to a bad man.  A good man returns a benefit, a bad man
does not receive one; and, if this is so, neither is any good man, nor
any bad man, ungrateful.  So in the whole realm of Nature, there is no
such thing as an ungrateful man, and the term is an empty one."

According to us Stoics there is only one sort of good, the
honourable. {honestum+} A bad man cannot possibly attain this; for he
will cease to be bad if virtue has entered into him; but, so long as
he is bad, no one is able to give him a benefit, because evils and
goods are opposites, and cannot unite.  Therefore, no one can do good
to him, for whatever good reaches him is vitiated by his wrong use of
it.  Just as the stomach, when it is impaired by discase, gathers
bile, and, changing all the food that it receives, turns every sort of
sustenance into a source of pain, so, in the case of the perverse
mind, whatever you entrust to it becomes to it a burden and a source
of disaster and wretchedness.  And so those who are most prosperous
and wealthy are beset with most trouble, and the more property they
have to cause them unrest, the less they find themselves.  Nothing,
therefore, which would be to their good can possibly come to bad men -
nay, nothing which would not do them harm.  For whatever good falls to
their lot they change into their own evil nature, and seemingly
attractive gifts that would be beneficial if they were given to a
better man become baneful to them.  Nor, therefore, are they able to
give a benefit, since no one is able to give what he does not have;
such a man lacks the desire to benefit,

But, though this is so, still even a bad man is able to receive
certain things that resemble benefits, and he will be ungrateful if he
does not return them.  There are goods of the mind, goods of the body,
and goods of fortune.  The fool and the bad man are debarred from the
goods of the mind; but he is admitted to the others - these he can
receive and ought to return, and, if he does not return them, he is
ungrateful.  And ours is not the only school that holds this doctrine.
The Peripatetics also, who widely extend the bounds of human
happiness, say that trifling benefits come even to the bad, and that
he who does not return such is ungrateful.  We, therefore, do not
agree that things that will not make the mind better are benefits;
nevertheless we do not deny that those things are advantageous and
desirable.  These things a bad man is able both to give to a good man
and to receive from him, such as money and clothing and public office
and life; and, if he does not return them, he will fall into the class
of the ungrateful. xxx "But," you retort, "how can you call a man
ungrateful if he fails to return something which you will not admit to
be a benefit?" Certain things, on account of their similarity, are
designated by the same term even at the expense of some inaccuracy.
Thus we speak of a silver and a golden "pyxis/a"; thus, too, we call a
man "illiterate," though he may be not utterly untutored but only not
acquainted with the higher branches of learning; thus, too, one who
has seen a man wretchedly clad and in rags says that the man he saw
was "naked." The things that we mean are not really benefits, but have
the appearance of benefits.  "Then," you retort, "just as these things
are quasi-benefits, so also the man is, not an ingrate, but a
quasi-ingrate." No, not so, because both the giver and the recipient
of these things call them benefits.  So, he who fails to return the
semblance of a true benefit is just as much an ingrate as he is a
poisoner who, when he thought that he was concocting poison, concocted
a sleeping-draught!

The words of Cleanthes/a are even stronger. "Granted," he says, "that
what the man received was not a benefit, yet he himself is an ingrate
because, even if he had received a benefit, he would not have returned
it." So, a man becomes a brigand even before he stains his hands with
blood, because he has armed himself to kill, and possesses the desire
to murder and rob; he practises and manifests wickedness in action,
but it does not begin there.  Men are punished for sacrilege, but no
man's hands can actually reach the gods.  "How," it is asked, "can
anyone be ungrateful to a bad man, since a bad man is unable to give a
benefit?" For the reason, of course, that, while the gift that was
received was not a benefit, it was called one.  If anyone receives
from a bad man any of these things that the ignorant/b possess, of
which even the bad have a store, it will be his duty to be grateful
with a like offering, and, no matter what may be the nature of the
gifts, to return them as true goods since he received them as true
goods.  A man is said to be in debt/a whether he owes pieces of gold
or pieces of leather stamped with the seal of the state, such as the
Lacedaemonians used, which serve the purpose of coined money.
Discharge your indebtedness in that kind by which you incurred it.
What benefits are, whether so great and noble a term should be
degraded by being applied to such mean and vulgar matter, does not
concern you; your search for truth is to the detriment of others.  Do
you adjust your minds to the semblance of truth, and, while you are
learning true virtue, honour whatever vaunts the name of virtue.

"As, according to you," I someone retorts, "no man is ungrateful, so,
on the other hand, all men are ungrateful." Yes, for, as we say, all
fools are bad; moreover, he who has one vice has them all; but all men
are foolish and bad; all men, therefore, are ungrateful. What, then?
Are they not?  Is it not an indictment that is everywhere brought
against the human race?  Is it not a universal complaint that benefits
are thrown away, that there are only a very few who do not requite
those who have treated them kindly with the greatest unkindness?  Nor
need you suppose that I am merely voicing the grumbling of the Stoics,
who count every act as most evil and wrong that falls short of the
standard of righteousness. Hear the voice of one who cries out
condemnation upon all nations and peoples, a voice that issues, not
from the home of philosophy, but from the midst of the crowd!

 No guest from host is safe, nor daughter's sire From daughter's
spouse; e'en brothers' love is rare.  The husband doth his wife, she
him, ensnare./b

---- Footnotes ----

b Ovid, Met. i. 144 sqq., cited also in De Ira, ii. 9. 2.

-------------------

This goes even further - here crime takes the place of benefits, and
the blood of those for whom blood ought to be shed is not spared; we
requite benefits with the sword and poison.  To lay hands upon the
fatherland itself and crush it with its own fasces is to gain rank and
power.  Whoever does not stand above the commonweal thinks that he
stands in a position that is low and degraded.  The armies that she
has given are turned against herself, and the general now harangues
his men with: "Fight against your wives, fight against your children!
Assail with arms your altars, hearths, and household gods!" Yes, you
who had no right to enter the city without the permission of the
senate even in order to triumph, who, when bringing back a victorious
army, should have been given an audience outside the walls, now, after
slaughtering your own countrymen, and stained with the blood of
kinsmen, enter into the city with flying flags.  Amidst the ensigns of
soldiers let Liberty be dumb, and, now that all war has been banished
afar, all terror suppressed, let that people who conquered and
pacified the nations of the earth be beleaguered within its own walls,
and shudder at the sight of its own eagles.

Ungrateful is Coriolanus,/a who became dutiful too late, and after
penitence for crime; he laid down his arms, but he laid them down in
the midst of unholy war.

Ungrateful is Catiline; he is not satisfied with seizing his
fatherland -he must overturn it, he must let loose against it the
cohorts of the Allobroges, he must summon an enemy from beyond the
Alps to satiate its old and inborn hatred, and pay with the lives of
Roman leaders the sacrifices long owed to Gallic tombs./a Ungrateful
is Gaius Marius {Coriolanus?+}, who, though raised from the rank of a
common soldier to repeated consulships, will feel that the change in
his fortune has been too slight, and that he would sink to his former
position did he not match the slaughter of the Cimbrians with a
sacrifice of Roman lives, did he not; not merely give, but himself
become, the signal for the destruction and butchery of his countrymen.

Ungrateful is Lucius Sulla, who healed his fatherland by remedies that
were harsher than her ills, who, having marched through human blood
all the way from the citadel of Praeneste to the Colline Gate, staged
other battles, other murders inside the city; two legions that had
been crowded into a corner he butchered; O! the cruelty of it, after
he had won the victory, O! the wickedness of it, after he had promised
them quarter; and he devised proscription, great gods! in order that
anyone who had killed a Roman citizen might claim impunity, money, all
but a civic crown!

Ungrateful is Gnaeus Pompeius, who in return for three consulships, in
return for three triumphs, in return for the many public offices into
most of which he had thrust himself before the legal age, showed such
gratitude to the commonwealth that he induced others/b also to lay
hands upon her - as if he could render his own power less odious by
giving several others the right to do what no man ought to have had
the right to do!  While he coveted extraordinary commands, while he
distributed the provinces to suit his own choice, while he divided the
commonwealth in such a way, that though a third person/c had a share,
two-thirds of it remained in his own family,a he reduced the Roman
people to such a plight that only by the acceptance of slavery were
they able to survive.  The foe and conqueror/b of Pompeius was himself
ungrateful. From Gaul and Germany he whirled war to Rome, and that
friend of the people, that democrat, pitched his camp in the Circus
Flaminius, even nearer to the city than Porsina's had been.  It is
true that he used the cruel privileges of victory with moderation; the
promise that he was fond of making he kept - he killed no man who was
not in arms.  But what of it?  The others used their arms more
cruelly, yet, once glutted, flung them aside; he quickly sheathed his
sword, but never laid it down.

Ungrateful was Antony to his dictator, who he declared was rightly
slain,/c and whose murderers he allowed to depart to their commands in
the provinces.  His country, torn as it had been by proscriptions,
invasions, and wars, after all her ills, he wished to make subject to
kings, who were not even Roman, in order that a city that had restored
sovereign rights, autonomy, and immunity to the Achaeans, the
Rhodians, and many famous cities, might herself pay tribute to
eunuchs!/a

The day will fail me to enumerate those whose ingratitude resulted in
the ruin of their country.  Equally endless will be the task if I
attempt a survey of how ungrateful the commonwealth herself has been
to its best and most devoted servants, and how it has sinned not less
often than it has been sinned against.  Camillus it sent into exile,
Scipio went with its con- -------- a An allusion to the Egyptian court
and Antony+'s surrender to the charms of Cleopatra.  sent; it exiled
Cicero, even after the conspiracy of Catiline, destroyed his home,
plundered his property, did everything that a victorious Catiline
would have done; Rutilius/a found his blamelessness rewarded with a
hiding-place in Asia; to Cato the Roman people refused the
praetorship, and persisted in refusing the consulship.

We are universally ungrateful.  Let each one question himself -
everyone will find someone to complain of for being ungrateful.  But
it is impossible that all men should complain, unless all men gave
cause for complaint - all men, therefore, are ungrateful.  Are they
ungrateful only?  They are also covetous and spiteful and cowardly -
especially those who appear to be bold.  Besides, all are
self-seeking, all are ungodly.  But you have no need to be angry with
them; pardon them - they are all mad. {Lear+} To refer you to
uncertain instances is not my desire, so I say: "See how ungrateful is
youth!  What young man does not long for his father's last day though
his hands are clean?  Does not look forward to it though he curbs his
desire?  Does not ponder it though he is dutiful?  How few there are
who dread so much the death of their best of wives that they do not
even calculate the probabilities?  What litigant, I ask you, after he
has been defended, retains the memory of so great a benefit beyond the
hour it happened?"

And all agree in asking who dies without complaint! Who on his last
day ventures to say:

 I've lived; my destined course I now have run.  Who does not shrink
from departure?  Who does not mourn it?  Yet not to be satisfied with
the time one has had is to be ungrateful.  Your days will always seem
few if you stop to count them.  Reflect that your greatest blessing
does not lie in mere length of time; make the best of it however short
it may be.  Though the day of your death should be postponed, your
happiness is in no whit enhanced, since life becomes, not more
blissful, but merely longer, by the delay.  How much better it is to
be grateful for the pleasures that have been enjoyed, not to reckon up
the years of others, but to set a generous value on one's own, and to
score them down as gain!  "God deemed me worthy of this, this is
enough; he might have given more, but even this is a benefit." Let us
be grateful to the gods, grateful to mankind, grateful to those who
have bestowed anvthing, upon ourselves, grateful also to those who
have bestowed anything upon our dear ones.  "You render me liable,"
you retort, "to infinite obligation when you say 'also upon our dear
ones'; so do set some limit.  According to you, he who gives a benefit
to a son, gives it also to his father.  This is the first question I
raise.  Secondly, I should like particularly to have this point
settled.  If the benefit is given also to your friend's father, is it
given also to his brother?  Also to his uncle?  Also to his
grandfather?  Also to his wife?  Also to his father-in-law? Tell me,
where must I stop, how far am I to pursue the list of relatives?" If I
cultivate your field, I shall give you a benefit; if your house is on
fire and I shall put it out, or if I keep it from tumbling down, I
shall give you a benefit; if I heal your slave, I shall charge the
service to you; if I save the life of your son, will you not have a
benefit from me?  xxx"The instances you offer are of a different
colour, for he who cultivates my field, gives a benefit, not to the
field, but to me; and he who props up my house - to keep it from
falling, bestows a benefit on me, for the house itself is without
feeling; because it has none, he makes me his debtor; and he who
cultivates my field, wishes to do a service, not to it, but to me.  I
should say the same of the slave, he is a chattel of mine, it is to my
advantage to have his life saved; therefore the debt is mine instead
of his.  But my son is himself capable of receiving a benefit; he,
therefore, receives it, while I merely rejoice, and, though I am
nearly concerned, I am not placed under obligation by it."

Nevertheless I should like you, who suppose that you are under no
obligation, to answer me this.  A father is concerned in the good
health, the happiness, the inheritance of his son; he is going to be
made more happy if he keeps his son alive, more unhappy if he has lost
him.  What, then?  If anyone is made happier by me, if he is freed
from the danger of the greatest unhappiness, does he not receive a
benefit?

"No," you answer, "for there are some things that, though they are
conferred upon others, pass on to us; but, in each case, the thing
ought to be required of the one upon whom it was conferred, just as,
in the case of a loan, money is sought from the one to whom it was
lent, although it may by some means have come into my hands.  There is
no benefit whose advantage does not extend to those who are nearest to
the recipient, sometimes even to those who are far removed; the
question is, not whither did the benefit pass from the one to whom it
was given, but where was it first placed.  You must be repaid by the
real debtor, the one who first received it." What, then?  I beg of
you, do you not say to me: "You have given me the life of my son, and,
if he had perished, I could not have survived him"?  Do you not owe a
benefit in return for the life of one whose safety you value above
your own?  Besides, when I have saved your son's life, you fall upon
your knees, you pay vows to the gods just as if your own life had been
saved; your lips utter these words: "Whether you have saved my own
life is to me of no concern; you have saved both our lives - nay,
rather, mine." Why do vou say this if you do not receive a benefit?

"Because, also, if my son were to obtain a loan of money, I should pay
his creditor, yet should not for that reason be indebted to him;
because also, if my son should be caught in adultery, I should blush,
yet should not for that reason become an adulterer.  I say that I am
indebted to you for my son's life, not because I really am, but
because I wish to constitute myself your debtor of my own free will.
But his safety has brought to me the greatest possible pleasure, the
greatest possible advantage, and I have escaped the heaviest of all
blows, the loss of a child.  The question is now, not whether you have
been of service to me, but whether you have given me a benefit; for a
dumb animal, or a stone, or a plant, can be of service, and yet they
cannot give a benefit, for a benefit is never given without an act of
the will.  But you wish to give, not to the father, but to the son,
and sometimes you do not even know the father.  Therefore, when you
have said: 'Have I not, then, given a benefit to the father by saving
the life of his son?' you must raise the counter-question: 'Have I,
then, given a benefit to the father, whom I do not know, of whom I had
no thought?' And what if, as will sometimes happen, you hate the
father, yet save the life of his son?  Will you be considered to have
given a benefit to one to whom, at the very time that you gave it, you
had the greatest hostility?" But, to lay aside the bickering of
dialogue, and to reply, as it were, judicially, I should say that the
purpose of the giver must be considered; he gave the benefit to the
one to whom he wished it to be given.  If he did it as a compliment to
the father, then the father received the benefit; if, as a service to
the son, the father is placed under no obligation by the benefit
conferred upon the son, even if he is pleased by it.  If, however, he
gets the opportunity, he will himself wish to bestow something, not
that he feels the necessity of repaying, but that he finds an excuse
for offering a service.  Repayment of the benefit must not be sought
from the father; if he does a generous act because of it, he is, not
grateful, but just.  For there can be no end to it - if I am giving a
benefit to my friend's father, I am giving it also to his mother, his
grandfather, his uncle, his children, his relatives, his friends, his
slaves, his country.  Where, then, does a benefit begin to stop?  For
there enters in the endless sorites,/a to which it is difficult to set
any limit, for it grows little by little, and never stops growing.
This, too, is a common question: "If two brothers are at variance, and
I save the life of one, do I give a benefit to the, other who will
probably regret that the brother he hated did not die?" There can be
no doubt that to render a service to a man even against his will is a
benefit, just as he who has rendered a service against his will has
not given a benefit.  "Do you," you ask, "call that which vexes him,
which torments him a benefit?" Yes, many benefits are, on their face,
stern and harsh, such as the cures wrought by surgery and cautery and
confinement in chains.  The point to consider is, not whether anyone
is made unhappy, but whether he ought to be made happy, by receiving a
benefit; a coin is not necessarily a bad one because a barbarian who
does not know the government stamp has rejected it.  A man both hates,
and yet accepts, a benefit provided that it does him good, provided
that the giver gave it in order that it might do him good.  It makes
no difference whether anyone accepts a good thing with a bad spirit or
not.  Come, consider the converse case.  A man hates his brother, but
it is to his advantage to keep him; if I have killed the brother, I do
not do him a benefit, although he may say that it is, and be glad of
it.  It is a very artful enemy who gets thanked for the injury he has
done!

"I understand; a thing that does good is a benefit, a thing that does
harm is not a benefit.  But see here, I will give you an instance
where neither good nor harm is done, and yet the act will be a
benefit.  Suppose I have found the corpse of someone's father in a
lonely place, and bury it.  I have done no good either to the man
himself (for what difference would it make to him in what fashion he
rotted?), or to the son (for what advantage does he gain by the
act?)."

I will tell you what he has gained.  Using me as his instrument, he
has performed a customary and necessary duty; I supplied to his father
what he would have wished, what it would also have been his duty, to
supply himself.  Yet such an act becomes a benefit only if I performed
it, not out of the sense of pity and humanity that would lead me to
hide away anybody's corpse, but because I recognized the body, and
supposed that I was rendering a service to the son.  But, if I have
thrown earth over an unknown dead man, I have by the act made no one
my debtor for this service - I am just generally humane.  But some one
will say: "Why do vou take so much trouble to discover to whom you
should give a benefit as though you intended to ask repayment some
day?  There are some who think that repayment ought never to be asked,
and the reasons they adduce are these.  An unworthy person will not
make return even when he is asked to do so, and the worthy man will
repay of his own accord.  Moreover, if you have given to a good man,
be patient; do not do him an injustice by dunning him, as though he
would not have made return of his own accord.  If you have given to a
bad man, you must blame yourself; but do not spoil a benefit by making
it a loan.  Besides, the law, by not bidding you to ask repayment,
forbids you." These are mere words.  So long as I have no pressing
need, so long as I am not foreed by fortune, I would rather lose a
benefit than ask for repayment.  If, however, the safety of my
children is at stake, if my wife is threatened with danger, if the
safety of my country and my liberty impel me to a course that I should
prefer not to take, I shall conquer my scruples, and bear witness that
I have done everything to avoid needing the help of an ungrateful
person; the necessity of receiving a return of my benefit will at last
overcome my reluctance to ask a return.  Again, when I give a benefit
to a good man, I do so with the intention of never asking a return
unless it should be necessary.  xxx"But," you say, "the law, by not
authorizing, forbids the exaction." There are many things that do not
come under the law or into court, and in these the conventions of
human life, that are more binding than anylaw+, show us the way.  No
law forbids us to divulge the secrets of friends; no law bids us keep
faith even with an enemy.  What law binds us to keep a promise that we
have made to anyone?  There is none.  Yet I shall have a grievance
against a person who has not kept the secret I told him, and I shall
be indignant with one who, after giving a promise, has not kept it.

"But," you say, "you are turning a benefit into a loan." By no means;
for I do not demand, but request, and I do not even request, but
simply remind.  Shall even the most pressing necessity ever force me
to go to one with whom there would be need for me to have a long
struggle?  If anyone is so ungrateful that a simple reminder will not
suffice, I shall pass him by, and judge him unworthy of being
compelled to be grateful.  As a money-lender makes no demand of
certain debtors who he knows have become bankrupt, and, to their
shame, have nothing left but what is already lost, so I shall pass
over certain men who are openly and obstinately ungrateful, and I
shall ask a benefit to be repaid by no one from whom I could not hope,
not to extort, but to receive, a return.  There are many who do not
know how either to disavow or to repay what they have received, who
are neither good enough to be grateful, nor bad enough to be
ungrateful - slow and dilatory people, backward debtors, but not
defaulters. Of these I shall make no demand, but shall admonish them
and turn them back from other interests to their duty.  They will
promptly reply to me: "Pardon me; upon my word, I did not know that
you missed the money, or I would have offered it of my own accord; I
beg you not to think me ungrateful; I am mindful of your favour to
me." Why should I hesitate to make such as these better men both in
their own eyes and in mine?  If can keep anyone from doing, wrong, I
shall; much more a friend - both from doing wrong and, most of all,
from doing wrong to me.  I bestow a second benefit upon him by, not
permitting him to be ungrateful; nor will I reproach him harshly with
what I had bestowed, but as gently as I can.  In order to give him an
opportunity to show his gratitude, I shall refresh his memory, and ask
for a benefit; he will himself understand that I am asking
repayment. Sometimes if l have hope of being able to correct his
fault, I shall use harsher words; yet, if he is beyond hope, I shall
not exasperate him as well, for fear that I may turn an ingrate into
an enemy.  But if we spare ungrateful men even the affront of an
admonition, we shall make them more dilatory in returning benefits.
Some, indeed, who are curable, if conscience pricks them, and might
become good men will be left to go to ruin if we withhold the
admonition by which a father at times reclaims his son, by which a
wife brings back to her arms an erring husband, and a friend
stimulates the flagging loyalty of a friend.  In order to awaken some
men, it is necessary only to shake, not to strike, them; in the same
way, in the case of some men, their sense of honour about returning
gratitude is, not extinct, but only asleep. {Bassanio+} Let us arouse
it.  "Do not," they might say, "turn your gift into an injury; for
injury it will be if you fail to ask repayment for the express purpose
of leaving me ungrateful.  What if I do not know what you desire?
What if I have not watched for an opportunity because I was distracted
by business+ and occupied with other interests?  Show me what I can
do, what you wish me to do.  Why do you lose faith before you put me
to the test?  Why are you in a hurry to lose both your benefit and a
friend?  How do you know whether I am unwilling, or merely unaware -
whether I am lacking in opportunity, or intention?  Give me a chance!"
I shall, therefore, remind him of my benefit, not bitterly, not
publicly, not with reproaches, but in such a way that he will think
that, instead of being brought back, he himself has come back, to the
recollection of it.

One of his veterans, being greatly incensed against his neighbours,
was once pleading his case before the deified Julius, and the case was
going against him.  "Do you remember, general" he said, "the time in
Spain when you sprained your ankle near the river Sucro?" When Caesar
replied that he remembered it, he continued: "Do you remember, too,
when, because of the powerful heat of the sun, you wanted to rest
under a certain tree that cast very little shade, that one of your
fellow-soldiers spread out his cloak for you because the ground, in
which that solitary tree had sprung up among the sharp stones, was
very rough?" When Caesar replied: "Of course I do; and, too, when I
was perishing with thirst, and wanted to crawl to a nearby spring
because, crippled as I was, I could not walk, unless my companion, who
was a strong and active man, had brought me some water in his helmet -
" "Could you, then, general," interrupted the veteran, "recognize that
man, or that helmet?" Caesar replied that he could not recognize the
helmet, but that he could the man, perfectly, and, irritated I suppose
because he allowed himself to revert to the old incident in the midst
of a trial, added: "You, at any rate, are not the one." "You have good
reason, Caesar," he replied, "not to recognize me; for, when this
happened, I was a whole man; later, during the battle of Munda, one of
my eyes was torn out, and some bones were taken from my skull.  And
you would not recognize that helmet if you saw it; for it was split by
a Spanish sword." Caesar gave orders that the man was not to be
troubled, and presented his old soldier with the bit of ground which,
because his neighbours made a path through it, had been the cause of
the quarrel and the suit.

What, then?  Because his commander's memory of a benefit he received
had been dimmed by a multitude of happenings, and his position as the
organizer of vast armies did not permit him to meet individual
soldiers, should the veteran not have asked him to return the benefit
he had conferred?  This is, not so much asking for the repayment of a
benefit, as taking repayment when it lies waiting in a convenient
place, although one must stretch forth one's hand in order to take
it. I shall, therefore, ask for repayment, when either the pressure of
great necessity, or the best interest of him from whom I am asking it
shall urge me to do so.

Tiberius Caesar, when a certain man started to say "You remember - ,"
interrupted him before he could reveal more evidence of an old
intimacy with: "I do not remember what I was." Why should he not have
been asked to repay a benefit?  He had a reason for desiring
forgetfulness; he was repudiating the acquaintance of all friends and
comrades, and wished men to behold only the high position he then
filled, to think and to talk only of that.  He regarded an old friend
as an accuser! xxx It is even more needful to choose the right time
for requesting the return of a benefit than for requesting its
bestowal.  We must be temperate in our language, so that the grateful
man may not take offence, nor the ungrateful pretend to do so.  If we
lived among wise men, it would have been our duty to keep silence and
wait; and yet it would have been better to indicate even to wise men
what the condition of our affairs demanded.  We petition even the
gods, whose knowledge nothing escapes, and, although our prayers do
not prevail upon them, they remind them of us.  Homer's priest,/a I
say, recounts even to the gods his services and his pious care of
their altars. The second best form of virtue is to be willing and able
to take advice./b The horse that is docile and obedient can easily be
turned hither and thither by a gentle movement of the reins.  Few men
follow reason as their best guide; next best are those who return to
the right path when they are admonished; these must not be deprived of
their guide.  The eyes, even when they are closed, still have the
power of sight, but do not use it; but the light of day, when it has
been admitted to them, summons their power of sight into service.
Tools lie idle unless the workman uses them to perform his task.  Our
minds all the while possess the virtuous desire, but it lies torpid,
now from their softness and disuse, now from their ignorance of duty.
We ought to render this desire useful, and, instead of abandoning it
in vexation to its weakness, we should bear with it as patiently as
schoolmasters bear with the blunders of young pupils when their memory
fails; and, just as one or two words of prompting will bring back to
their memory the context of the speech they must deliver, so the
virtuous desire needs some reminder to recall it to the repayment of
gratitude.

BOOK VI

THERE are some matters, my most excellent Liberalis, that are
investigated simply for the sake of exercising the intellect, and lie
altogether outside of life; others that are a source of pleasure while
the investigation is in progress, and of profit when it is finished.
I shall lay the whole store of them before you; do you, as you may
feel inclined, order me either to discuss them at length, or merely to
present them in order to show the programme of the entertainment.  But
something will be gained even from those which you may order to be at
once dismissed: for there is some advantage in discovering even what
is not worth learning, I shall, therefore, watch the expression of
your face, and, according as it guides me, deal with some questions at
greater length, and pitch others headlong out of court.

The question has been raised whether it is possible to take away a
benefit.  Some say that it is not possible, for a benefit is, not a
thing, but an act.  As a gift is one thing, the act of giving another,
as a sailor is one thing, the act of sailing another, and, as a sick
man and his disease are not the same thing although a sick man is not
without discase, so a benefit is one thing, and that which anyone
receives by means of the benefit another, the benefit is incorporeal,
and is never rendered invalid; the matter of it is passed from hand to
hand, and changes its owner.  And so, when you take this away, even
Nature herself is not able to recall what she has once given./a She
may break off her benefits, she cannot annul them; he who dies has
nevertheless lived; he who has lost his eyes has nevertheless seen.
Blessings that we have received can cease to be ours, but they can
never cease from having been ours; what has been, too, is part of a
benefit, and, indeed, its surest part.  Sometimes we are kept from
very long enjoyment of a benefit, but the benefit itself is not
obliterated.  Nature is not allowed to reverse her acts, though she
should summon all her powers to the task.  A man's house, his money,
his property, everything that passes under the name of a benefit, may
be taken away from him, but the benefit itself remains fixed and
unmoved; no power can efface the fact that this man has given, and
that one received.

Those seem to me noble words, which in the poet Rabirius/b are
ascribed to Mark Antony+, when, seeing his fortune deserting him, and
nothing left him but the privilege of dying, and even that on the
condition of his seizing it promptly, he is made to exclaim:

Whatever I have given+, that I still possess {Akumal+} O! how much he
might have possessed if he had wished!  These are the riches that will
abide, and remain steadfast amid all the fickleness of our human lot;
and, the greater they become, the less envy they will arouse.  Why do
vou share your wealth as though it were your own?  You are but a
steward. {trustee+} All these possessions that force you to swell with
pride, and, exalting you above mortals, cause you to forget your own
frailty; all these that you guard with iron bars and watch under arms;
stolen from others at the cost of their blood, you defend at the cost
of your own; these for which you launch fleets to dye the sea with
blood; these for which you shatter cities to destruction, uncomncsious
of how many arrows of Fortune you may be preparing for you behind your
back; these for which you have so many times violated the ties of
kinship, and of partnership, while the whole world lies crushed amid
the rivalry of two contestants - all these are not your own.  They are
committed to your safe keeping. and at any moment may find another
guardian; your enemy will seize upon them, or the heir who accounts
you an enemy.  Do you ask how you can make them your own?  By
bestowing them as gifts!  Do you therefore, make the best of your
possessions, and, by making therm, not only safer, but more
honourable, render your own claim to them assured and inviolable. The
wealth that you esteem, that, as you think, makes you rich and
powerful, is buried under an inglorious name so long as you keep it.
It is but house, or slave, or money; when you have given it away, it
is a benefit.

"You admit," says someone, "that there are times when we are under no
obligation to the man from whom we have received a benefit; it has,
therefore, been taken away." There are many things that might cause us
to cease to feel indebted for a benefit, not because it has been
removed, but because it has been ruined.  Suppose a man defends me in
a lawsuit, but has forced my wife to commit adultery; he has not
removed his benefit, but has freed me from indebtedness by matching
his benefit with an equally great wrong, and, if he has injured me
more than he had previously benefited me, he not only extinguishes my
gratitude, but leaves me free to protest and avenge myself whenever,
in balancing the two, the wrong outweighs the benefit; thus the
benefit is not withdrawn, but is surpassed.  Tell me, are not some
fathers so harsh and so wicked that it is right and proper to turn
away from them and disown them?  Have they, then, withdrawn the
benefits that they had given?  By no means, but their unfeeling
conduct in later years has removed the favour that they had won from
all their earlier service.  It is not the benefit, but gratitude for
the benefit, that is removed, and the result is, not that I do not
possess it, but that I am under no obligation for it.  It is just as
if someone should lend me money, and then set fire to my house.  The
loan has been balanced by my loss; I have made him no return, and yet
I owe him nothing.  In the same way, too, a man who has acted kindly
and generously toward me, yet later has shown himself in many ways
haughty, insulting, and cruel, places me in the position of being just
as free from any obligation to him as if I had never received
anything; he has murdered his benefits. Though the lease remains in
force, a landlord has no claim against his tenant if he tramples upon
his crops, if he cuts down his orchard; not because he received the
payment agreed upon, but because he has made it impossible to receive
it.  So, too, a creditor is often adjudged to his debtor, when on some
other account he has robbed him of more than he claims on account of
the loan.  It is not merely the creditor and debtor who have a judge
to sit between them, and say: "You lent the man money.  Very well,
then!  But you drove off his flock, you killed his slave, you have in
your possession silver that you did not buy; having calculated the
value of these, you who came into court as a creditor, must leave it
as a debtor." So, too, a balance is struck between benefits and
injuries.  Often, I say, the benefit endures, and yet imposes no
obligation. If the giver repents of his gift, if he says that he is
sorry that he gave it, if he sighs, or makes a wry face when he gives
it, if he thinks that he is, not bestowing, but throwing away, his
gift, if he gave it to please himself, or, at any rate, not to please
me, if he persists in being offensive, in boasting of his gift, in
bragging of it everywhere, and in making it painful to me, the benefit
endures, although it imposes no obligation, just as certain sums of
money to which a creditor can establish no legal right may be owed to
him though he cannot demand them.  You have bestowed a benefit upon
me, yet afterwards you did me an injury; the reward of a benefit
should be gratitude, of an injury punishment; but I do not owe you
gratitude, nor do you owe me my revenge - the one is absolved by the
other.  When we say: "I have returned to him his benefit," we mean
that we have returned, not the actual gift that we had received, but
something else in its place.  For to return is to give one thing in
return for another; evidently so, since in every act of repayment we
return, not the same object, but the same value.  For we are said to
have returned money even though we count out gold coins for silver,
and, even though no money passes between us, payment may be effected
by the assignment of a debt and orally. xxx I think I hear you saying:
"You are wasting your time; for what is the use of my knowing whether
the benefit that imposes no obligation remains a benefit.  This is
like the clever stupidities of lawyers, who declare that one can take
possession, not of an inheritance, but only of the objects that are
included in the inheritance, just as if there were any difference
between an inheritance and the objects that are included in an
inheritance./a Do you, instead, make clear for me this point, which
may be of some practical use.  When the same man has bestowed on me a
benefit, and has afterwards done me an injury, ought I to return to
him the benefit, and nevertheless to avenge myself upon him, and to
make reply, as it were, on two distinct scores, or ought I to combine
the two into one, and take no action at all, leaving the benefit to be
wiped out by the injury, and the injury be the benefit?  For this is
what I see is the practice of our courts; you Stoics should know what
the law is in your school.  In the courts the processes are kept
separate, and the case that I have against another and the case that
another has against me are not merged under one formula.  If anyone
deposits a sum of money in my safekeeping, and the same man afterwards
steals something from me, I shall proceed against him for theft, and
he will proceed against me for the money deposited."

The instances that you have set forth, Liberalis, come under fixed
laws, which we are bound to follow.  One law does not merge into
another law; each proceeds along its own way.  A particular action
deals with a deposit, and just as clearly another deals with theft.
But a benefit is subject to no law, it makes me the judge.  I have the
right to compare the amount of good or the amount of harm anyone may
have done me, and then to decide whether he is more indebted to me, or
I to him.  In legal actions we ourselves have no power, we must follow
the path by which we are led; in the case of a benefit I have all the
power, I render judgement.  And so I make no separation or distinction
between benefits and injuries, but commit them both to the same judge.
Otherwise, you force me to love and to hate, and to complain and to
give thanks, at the same time; but this is contrary to nature.
Instead, after making a comparison of benefit and injury, I shall
discover whether there is still any balance in my favour.  As, if
anyone imprints other lines of writing upon my manuscript, he
conceals, though he does not remove, the letters that were there
before, so an injury that comes on top of a benefit does not allow the
benefit to be seen.

Your face, by which I agreed to be guided, is now puckered and
frowning, as though I were straying too far afield. You seem to me to
be saying:

Whither so far to the right?  Port your helm Hug the shore./a <Aeneid>
I cannot more closely.  So now, if you think that I have exhausted
this question, let me pass to the next one - whether anyone who does
us a service without wishing to, imposes any obligation upon us.  I
might have expressed this more clearly, but the proposition had to be
stated somewhat obscurely in order that it might be shown by the
distinction immediately following that two questions are involved -
both whether we are under any obligation to a man who does us a
service against his will, and whether we are under obligation to one
who does us a service without knowing it.  For why a man does not
place us under obligation if he has done us some favour because he was
foreed to is so clear that no words need to be devoted to it.  Both
this question and any similar one that can be raised will be easily
settled if in every case we direct our attention to the thought that a
benefit is always something that is conveyed to us, in the first
place, by some intent, in the second place, by some intent that is
kind and friendly.  Consequently we do not expend our thanks upon
rivers even though they may bear large ships, flow in copious and
unfailing stream for the conveyance of merchandise, or wind
beauteously and full of fish through the rich farm-lands.  And no one
conceives of himself as being indebted for a benefit to the Nile, any
more than he would owe it a grudge if it overflowed its banks
immoderately, and was slow in retiring; the wind does not bestow a
benefit, even though its blast is gentle and friendly, nor does
wholesome and serviceable food.  For he who would give me a benefit
must not only do, but wish to do, me a service. We, therefore, become
indebted neither to dumb animals - and yet how many men have been
rescued from peril by the speed of a horse! nor to trees -and yet how
many toilers have been sheltered from the summer's heat by the shade
of their boughs!  But what difference does it make whether I have
received a service from someone who did not know, or from someone who
was not able to know, that he was doing it if in both cases the desire
to do it was lacking?  What difference is there between expecting me
to feel indebted for a benefit to a ship or to a carriage or to a
spear, and expecting me to feel indebted to a man who had just as
little intention as they of performing a good act, yet chanced to do
me a service?
 
Anyone can receive, but no one can bestow, a benefit without knowing
it.  Many sick persons are cured by chance happenings that are not for
that reason to be counted remedies, and a man's falling into a river
in very cold weather has restored him to health; some have had a
quartan fever broken by a flogging, and the dangerous hours passed
unnoticed because their sudden fear diverted their attention to
another trouble, and yet none of these things are for that reason to
be counted salutary, even if they have restored health.  In like
manner, certain persons do us service while they are unwilling, nay,
because they are unwilling; and yet they do not for that reason make
us indebted for a benefit, because it was Fortune that turned their
harmful designs into good.  Do you think that I am under any
obligation to a man whose hand struck my enemy when it was aimed at
me, who, unless he had blundered, would have done me an injury?  Often
a witness, by openly perjuring himself, causes even truthful witnesses
to be disbelieved, and yet arouses compassion for the man under
accusation because he seems to be beset by a conspiracy. Some men have
been saved by the very power that was exerted to crush them, and
judges, who were about to convict a man on the score of his case have
refused to convict him on the score of influence./a Yet, although the
great men did him a service, it was not a benefit that they bestowed
upon the accused, because it is a question of, not what the dart hits,
but what it was aimed at, and it is, not the result, but the
intention,that distinguishes a benefit from an injury.  My opponent,
by contradicting the judge, by offending him by his arrogance, and by
rashly reducing his case to one witness, advanced my cause; I do not
consider whether his mistake helped me - he meant to do me harm.

Of course, in order to show gratitude to benefactor, I must wish to do
the same thing that he must have wished in order to give a benefit to
me.  Can anything be more unjust than to hate a person who has trodden
upon your foot in a crowd, or splashed you, or shoved you where you
did not wish to go?  Yet, since he actually does us an injury, what
besides the fact that he did not know what he was doing exempts him
from blame?  The same reason keeps this man from having given us a
benefit, and that one from having done us an injury; it is the
intention that makes both the friend and the enemy.  How many have
escaped military service because of sickness!  Some have escaped from
sharing the destruction of their house by being forced by an enemy to
appear in court, some have escaped falling into the hands of pirates
by having met with shipwreck; yet such happenings do not impose the
obligation of a benefit, because chance has no sense of the service
rendered, nor does an enemy, whose lawsuit, while it harassed and
detained us, saved our lives.  Nothing can be a benefit that does not
proceed from goodwill, that is not recognized as such by the one who
gives it.  Someone did me a service without knowing it - I am under no
obligation to him.  Someone did me a service when he wished to injure
me - I will imitate him!

Let us revert to the first type.  Would you have me do something in
order to show my gratitude?  But he himself did nothing in order to
give me a benefit!  Passing to the second type, do you wish me to show
gratitude to such a man - of my own will to return what I received
from him against his will?  And what shall I say of the third type,
the man who stumbled into doing a benefit in trying to do an injury?
To render me indebted to you for a benefit, it is not enough that you
wished to give; but, to keep me from being indebted to you, it is
enough that you did not wish to give.  For a benefit is not
accomplished by a mere wish; but, because the best and most copious
wish would not be a benefit if good fortune had been lacking, just as
truly good fortune is not a benefit unless the good wish has preceded
the good fortune.  For in order to place me under obligation to you,
you must not merely have done me a service, but have done it
intentionally.

Cleanthes makes use of the following example. "I sent," he says, "two
lads to look for Plato and bring him to me from the Academy.  One of
them searched through the whole colonnade, and also hunted through
other places in which he thought that he might be found, but returned
home alike weary and unsuccessful; the other sat down to watch a
mountebank near by, and, while amusing himself in company with other
slaves, the careless vagabond found Plato without looking for him, as
he happened to pass by.  The first lad, he says, will have our praise,
for, to the best of his ability, he did what he had been ordered; the
fortunate idler we shall flog."

It is the desire that, according to us, establishes the service; and
consider what the terms are if you would place me under obligation.
It is not enough for a man to have the wish without having done a
service; it is not enough to have done a service without having had
the wish.  For suppose that someone wished to make a gift, but did not
make it; I have, it is true, the intention, but I do not have the
benefit, for its consummation requires both an object and an
intention.  Just as I owe nothing to a man who wished to lend me
money, but did not supply it, so, if a man wished to give me a
benefit, but was not able to do so, though I shall remain a friend, I
shall be under no obligation to him; and I shall wish to bestow
something upon him (for he wished to bestow something on me), but, if,
having enjoyed better fortune than he, I shall have succeeded in
bestowing it, I shall not be returning gratitude, but shall be giving
him a benefit.  What he will owe me will be the repayment of
gratitude; the favour will begin with me, it will be counted from me.

I already know what you wish to ask; there is no need for you to say
anything; your countenance speaks for you.  "If anyone has done us a
service for his own sake, are we," you ask, "under any obligation to
him?  For I often hear you complain that there are some things that
men bestow upon themselves, but charge them up to others." I will tell
you, Liberalis; but first let me break up that question, and separate
what is fair from what is unfair.  For it makes a great difference
whether anyone gives us a benefit for his own sake, or for his own
sake and ours.  He who looks wholly to his own interest, and does us a
service only because he could not otherwise do himself a service,
seems to me to be in a class with the man who provides food for his
flock summer and winter; in a class with the man who, in order that he
may sell his captives to greater advantage, feeds them, stuffs them as
fat as oxen, and rubs them down; in a class with the fencing-master
who takes the greatest pains in training and equipping his troop of
gladiators.  There is a great difference, as Cleanthes says, between
benefaction and trade.

On the other hand, I am not so unjust as to feel under no obligation
to a man who, when he was profitable to me, was also profitable to
himself.  For I do not require that he should consult my interests
without any regard to his own, nay, I am also desirous that a benefit
given to me should be even more advantageous to the giver, provided
that, when he gave it, he was considering us both, and meant to divide
it between himself and me.  Though he should possess the larger part
of it, provided that he allowed me to share in it, provided that he
considered both of us, I am, not merely unjust, I am ungrateful, if I
do not rejoice that, while he has benefited me, he has also benefited
himself.  It is supreme niggardliness to say that nothing can be a
benefit that does not inflict some hardship upon the giver of it.

To one of the other type, the man who gives a benefit for his own sake
only, I shall reply: "Having made use of me, why have you any more
right to say that you have been of service to me, than I have to you?"
"Suppose," he retorts," that the only way in which I can obtain a
magistracy is to ransom ten out of a great number of captive citizens;
will you owe me nothing when I have freed you from bondage and chains?
Yet I shall do that for my own sake only." To this I reply: "In this
case vou are acting partly for your own sake, partly for mine - for
your own, in paying the ransom, for mine, in paying a ransom for me.
For you would have served your own interests sufficiently by ransoming
any you chose.  I am, therefore, indebted to you, not because you
ransom me, but because you choose me; for you might have attained the
same thing by ransoming someone else instead of me.  You divide the
advantage of your act with me, and you permit me to share in a benefit
that will be of profit to both of us.  You prefer me to others; all
this you do for my sake only. if, therefore, you would be made praetor
by ransoming ten captives, and there were only ten of us in captivity,
no one of us would owe you anything, for you would have nothing apart
from your own advantage which you could charge up to anyone of us.  I
do not regard a benefit jealously, nor desire that the whole of it
should be given to me, but,I desire a part."

"That, then," he replies, "if I had committed your names to a choice
by lot, and your name had appeared among those to be ransomed, would
you owe nothing to me?" Yes, I should owe something, but very little;
just how much, I will tell you.  In that case you do something for my
sake, in that you admit me to the chance of being ransomed.  I owe it
to Fortune that my name was drawn; I owe it to you that my name could
be drawn.  You gave me the opportunity to share in your benefit, for
the greater part of which I am indebted to Fortune; but I am indebted
to you for the fact that I was able to become indebted to Fortune.  I
shall wholly omit notice of those who make benefaction mercenary, for
he who gives in this spirit takes count of, not to whom, but on what
terms, he will give a benefit that is wholly directed to his own
interest.  Someone sells me grain; I cannot live unless I buy it; yet
I do not owe my life to him because I bought it.  And I consider, not
how necessary the thing was without which I could not have lived, but
how little gratitude I owe for something that I should not have had
unless I had bought it, in the transportation of which the trader
thought, not of how much help he would bring to me, but of how much
gain he would bring to himself.  What I have paid for entails no
obligation.

"According to that," you say, "you would claim that you are under no
obligation to your physician beyond his paltry fee, nor to your
teacher, because you have paid him some money.  Yet for all these we
have great affection, great respect." The answer to this is that the
price paid for some things does not represent their value.  You pay a
physician for what is invaluable, life and good health, a teacher of
the liberal sciences for the training of a gentleman and cultivation
of the mind.  Consequently the money paid to these is the price, not
of their gift, but of their devotion in serving us, in putting aside
their own interests and giving their time to us; they get paid, not
for their worth, but for their trouble.  Yet I might more truly make
another statement, which I shall at once present, having first pointed
out how your quibble can be refuted. "If," you say, "the value of some
things is greater than the price they cost, then, although you have
paid for them, you still owe me something besides." But, in the first
place, what difference does it make what they are really worth, since
the seller and the buyer have agreed upon their price?  In the second
place, I bought the thing, not at its own value, but at your price.
"It is," you retort, "worth more than it costs." Yes, but it could not
have been sold for more.  Besides, the price of everything varies with
circumstances; though vou have well praised your wares, they are worth
only the highest price at which they can be sold; a man, therefore,
who buys them cheap, owes nothing more to the seller.  Again, even if
they are worth more, nevertheless the fact that their price is
determined, not by their utility or efficacy, but by the customary
rate of the market, does not imply that there is any gift on your
part.  At what would you value the service of the man who crosses the
seas, and, when he has lost sight of the land, traces an unerring
course through the midst of the waves, who forecasts coming storms,
and suddenly orders the crew, when they have no sense of danger, to
furl the sails, to lower the tackle, and to stand ready to meet the
assault and sudden fury of the storm?  Yet this man's reward for such
great service is paid by the passenger's fare!  What value do you set
on finding lodging in a wilderness, a shelter in rain, a warm bath or
a fire in cold weather?  Yet I know at what price I can obtain these
things when I enter an inn!  How great a service does he do us who
props up our tottering house, and with unbelievable skill keeps erect
a group of buildings that are showing cracks at the bottom!  Yet a
contract for underpinning is made at a fixed and cheap rate.  The city
wall provides us protection from the enemy and from the sudden attacks
of brigands; yet it is well known how much a workman is paid each day
for erecting the towers provided with parapets to assure the public
safety.

My task would be endless if I tried to collect more instances to prove
that valuable things are sold at a low price.  What, then?  Why is it
that I owe something more to my physician and my teacher, and yet do
not complete the payment of what is due to them?  Because from being
physician and teacher they pass into friends, and we are under
obligation to them, not because of their skill, which they sell, but
because of their kindly and friendly goodwill.  If, therefore, a
physician does nothing more than feel my pulse, and put me on the list
of those whom he visits in his rounds, instructing me what to do or to
avoid without any personal feeling, I owe him nothing more than his
fee, because he views me, not as a friend, but as a commander./a Nor
is there any reason why I should venerate a teacher if he has
considered me merely one of his many pupils, and has not deemed me
worthy of any particular and special consideration, if he has not
directed his attention to me, but has allowed me, not so much to learn
from him, as to pick up any knowledge that he spilled into our midst.
What reason, then, do we have for being much indebted to them?  It is,
not that what they have sold is worth more than we paid for it, but
that they have contributed something to us personally.  Suppose a
physician gave me more attention than was professionally necessary;
that it was, not for his professional reputation, but for me, that he
feared; that he was not content to indicate remedies, but also applied
them; that he sat at my bedside among my anxious friends, that he
hurried to me at the crises of my illness; that no service was too
burdensome, none too distasteful for him to perform; that he was not
indifferent when he heard my moans; that, though a host of others
called for him, I was always his chief concern; that he took time for
others only when my illness had permitted him - such a man has placed
me under obligation, not as a physician, but as a friend.  Suppose,
again, that the other endured labour and weariness in teaching me;
that, besides the ordinary sayings of teachers, there are things which
he has transmitted and instilled into me; that by his encouragement he
aroused the best that was in me, at one time inspirited me by his
praise, at another warned me to put aside sloth; that, laying hand, so
to speak, on my mental powers that then were hidden and inert, he drew
them forth into the light; that, instead of doling out his knowledge
grudgingly in order that there might be the longer need of his
service, he was eager, if he could, to pour the whole of it into me -
if I do not owe to such a man all the love that I give to those to
whom I am bound by the most grateful ties, I am indeed ungrateful.

If the hawkers of even the meanest forms of service seem to us to have
put forth unusual effort, we give them something besides what we have
agreed upon; we dispense gratuities to a pilot, to a man who works
with the commonest material, and to one who hires out his services by
the day.  Surely, in the case of the noblest professions that either
maintain or beautify life, a man is ungrateful if he thinks that he
owes no more than he bargained for.  Add, too, that in the
transmission of such knowledge mind is fused with mind; therefore,
when this happens, to the teacher, and to the physician as well, is
paid the price of his service, but the price of his mind is still
owed.  Once when Plato had been put across a river in a boat, and
found that the ferryman asked for no pay, thinking that he had been
shown a special compliment, said that the ferryman had placed Plato
under obligation to him.  But a little later, when he saw him just as
zealously convey one after another across without any charge, he
denied that the ferryman had placed Plato under any obligation to him.
For, if you wish me to feel indebted for something that you bestow,
you must bestow it, not merely upon me, but because of me; you cannot
dun any man for the dole that you fling to the crowd.  What, then?
Will no one owe you anything in return for it?  No one as an
individual; the debt that I owe in company with all I shall pay in
company with all. "Do you say," you ask, "that a man who has carried
me across the river Po in a boat without charge gives me no benefit?"
I do.  He does me a good turn, but he does not give me a benefit; for
he does it for his own sake, or, at any rate, not for mine.  In short,
even the man himself does not suppose that he is giving a benefit to
me, but he bestows it for the sake of the state, or of the
neighbourhood, or of his own ambition, and in return for it he expects
some sort of advantage quite different from that which he might
receive from individual passengers.  "What, then," you say, "if the
emperor should grant citizenship to all the Gauls, and exemption from
taxes to all the Spaniards, would the individual on account of that
owe him nothing?" Of course he would owe something, but he would owe
it, not because of a personal benefit, but because of his share in a
public benefit. "The emperor," he says, "had no thought of me at the
time when he benefited us all; he did not desire to give citizenship
to me personally, nor did he direct his attention to me; so why should
I feel indebted to one who did not put me before himself when he was
thinking of doing what he did?" In the first place, when he planned to
benefit all the Gauls, he planned to benefit me also; for I was a
Gaul, and under my national, even if not under my personal,
designation he included me.  In the second place, I shall, in like
manner, be indebted to him as having received, not a personal, but a
general, gift; being one of the people, I shall not pay the debt as
one incurred by myself, but shall contribute to it as one incurred by
my country.  If anyone should lend money to my country, I should not
call myself his debtor, nor should I declare this as my debt when a
candidate for office or a defendant in a suit/a; yet I will pay my
share toward quashing the indebtedness.  So I deny that a gift which
is given to an entire people makes me a debtor, because, while it was
given to me, it was not given because of me, and, while it was given
to me, the giver was not aware that he was giving to me; nevertheless
I shall be aware that I must pay something for the gift, because after
a roundabout course it arrived also at me. An act that lays me under
obligation must have been done because of me.

"According to that," you say, "you are under no obligation to the sun
or to the moon; for they do not perform their movements solely because
of you." But, since the purpose of their movements is to preserve the
universe, they perform their movements for my sake also; for I am a
part of the universe.  And besides, our position is different from
theirs; for he who does me a service in order that by means of me he
may do himself a service, has not given a benefit, because he has made
me an instrument for his own advantage.  But in the case of the sun
and the moon, even if they do us a service for their own sake, yet
their purpose in doing the service is not that by means of us they may
do themselves a service; for what is there that we can possibly bestow
on them?

"I should be sure," you say, "that the sun and the moon really wish to
do us a service if it was possible for them to be unwilling; but they
cannot help being in motion.  In short, let them halt and discontinue
their work." But see in how many ways this argument may be refuted.
It is not true that a man who is unable to refuse is for that reason
the less willing to do; nay, the greatest proof of a fixed desire is
the impossibility of its being altered. {duty+} A good man is unable
to fail to do what he does; for unless he did it, he would not be a
good man.  And, therefore, a good man gives a benefit, not because he
does what he ought to do, but because,it is not possible for him not
to do what he ought to do.  Besides, it makes a great difference
whether you say: "It is not possible for him not to do this," because
he is forced to do it, or "It is not possible for him to be
unwilling." For, if he is compelled to do it, I owe my benefit, not to
him, but to the one who forces him; if he is compelled to wish to do
it for the reason that he finds nothing better that he wishes to do,
it is a case of the man forcing himself; so, while, in the one case, I
should not be indebted to him on the ground that he was forced, in the
other, I am indebted to him on the ground that he forces himself.

"Let them cease wishing,"/a you say.  At this point the following
question should occur to you.  Who is so crazy as to deny that an
impulse that is in no danger of ceasing and being changed into the
exact opposite can be a desire, when, on the contrary, no one must
appear more surely to have desire than one whose desire is so
completely fixed as to be everlasting?/a Or, if even he who is able at
any moment to change his desire may be said to have desire, shall not
he whose nature does not admit his changing a desire appear to have
desire?

"Very well! let them stop moving if they can," you say.  But you
really mean this: {Ode_to_Duty+} "Let all the heavenly 'bodies,
separated as they are by vast distances and appointed to the task of
guarding the universe, leave their posts; let sudden confusion arise,
let stars clash with stars, let the harmony of the world be destroyed,
and the divine creations totter to destruction; let the heavenly
mechanism, movin as it does with the swiftest speed, abandon in the
midst of its course the progressions that had been promised for so
many ages, and let the heavenly bodies that now, as they alternately
advance and retreat, by a timely balancing keep the world at an
equable temperature be suddenly consumed by flames, and, with their
infinite variations broken up, let them all pass into one condition;
let fire claim all things, then let sluggish darkness take its place,
and let these many gods/b be swallowed up in the bottomless abyss." Is
it worth while to cause all this destruction in order to convince you?
They do you a service even against your will, and for your sake they
follow their courses even if these result from some earlier and more
important cause.

Remark, too, at this point, that the gods are constrained by no
external force, but that their own will is a law to them for all
time. {duty+} What they have determined upon, they do not change, and,
consequently, it is impossible that they should appear likely to do
something although it is against their will, since they have willed to
persist in doing whatever it is impossible for them to cease from
doing,/a and the gods never repent of their original decision.
Undoubtedly, it is not in their power to halt and to desert to an
opposite position, but it is for no other reason than that their own
resolution holds them to their purpose; and they continue in it, not
from weakness, but because they have no desire to stray from the best
course, and it was decreed that this is the path for them to follow.
Moreover, when, at the time of the original creation, they set in
order the universe, they had regard also for our interests, and took
account of man; it cannot be thought, therefore, that they follow
their courses and display their work merely for their own sake, for we
also are a part of that work.  We are indebted, therefore, to the sun
and the moon and the rest of the heavenly host for a benefit, because,
even though the purposes for which they rise are in their eyes more
important, nevertheless in their progress toward these greater things
they do assist us.  Besides, too, they assist us in accordance with a
set purpose, and, therefore, we are placed under obligation to them,
because we do not stumble upon a benefit from those who are unaware of
their gift, but they knew that we should receive the gifts that we do;
and, although they may have a greater purpose, and greater reward for
their effort than the mere preservation of mortal creatures, yet from
the beginning of things their thought has been directed also to our
interests, and from the order bestowed upon, the world it becomes
clear that they did not regard their interest in us as a matter of
very small concern.  We owe filial duty to our parents, and yet many
at the time of their union had no thought of begetting us.  But it is
not possible for us to suppose that the gods did not know what they
would accomplish when they promptly supplied to all men food and
support, nor were those for whom they produced so many blessings
begotten without purpose.

Nature took thought of us before she created us, nor are we such a
trifling creation that we could merely have dropped from her
hand. {Nature+} See how great privilege she has bestowed upon us, how
the terms of man's empire do not restrict him to mankind; see how
widely she allows our bodies to roam, she has not confined them within
the limits of the land, but has dispatched them into every part of her
domain; see how great is the audacity of our minds, how they alone
either know, or seek, the gods, and, by directing their thought on
high, commune with powers divine.  You will discover that man is not a
hasty and purposeless creation.  Among the greatest of her works
Nature has none of which she can more boast, or, surely, no other to
which she can boast.  What madness it is to quarrel with the gods over
their gift!  How shall a man show gratitude to those to whom he cannot
return gratitude without expenditure, if he denies that he has
received anything from beings from whom he has received most of all,
from those who are always ready to give and will never expect return?
And how blind men are not to feel indebted to someone for the very
reason that he is generous even to one who denies his gift, and to
call the very continuance and succession of his benefits a proof that
he is forced to give, them!  Put in the lips of these such words as:
"I don't want it!", "Let him keep it!", "Who asks him for it?" and all
the other utterances of insolent minds.  Yet it is not true that you
are under less obligation to one whose bounty extends to you even
while you deny it, whose benefits include even this the greatest of
all - a readiness to give to you even while you complain.

Do you not see how parents force their children in the stage of tender
infancy to submit to wholesome measures?  Though the infants struggle
and cry, they tend their bodies with loving care, and, fearing that
their limbs may become crooked from too early liberty, they swathe
them in order that they may grow to be straight, and later they force
them to take a liberal education, and, if they are unwilling, resort
to the incentive of fear; finally, upon the recklessness of youth they
inculcate thrift, decency, and good habits and use force if it is too
unheedful.  As they grow up, too, and are now their own masters, if
from fear or from insubordination they refuse needed remedies,
sternness and force are applied.  And so the greatest of all benefits
are those that, while we are either unaware or unwilling, we receive
from our parents. Like those who are ungrateful and repudiate
benefits, not because they do not wish them, but in order to escape
obligation, are those who at the other extreme are too grateful, who
pray that some trouble or some misfortune may befall those who have
placed them under obligation, in order that they may have a chance to
prove how gratefully they remember the benefit they have received.  It
is debated whether they are right in doing this, and act from a
dutiful desire.  They are very much in the same state of mind as those
who are inflamed with abnormal love, who long for their mistress to be
exiled in order that they may accompany her in her loneliness and
flight, who long that she may be poor in order that she may have more
need of their gifts, who long that she may be ill in order that they
may sit at her bedside, who, though her lovers, pray for all that an
enemy might long for her to have.  And so the results of hatred and
insane love are almost the same.  Somewhat similar is the case of
those who long for their friends to have troubles in order that they
may remove them, and arrive at beneficence by doing an injury, though
it would be better for them to do nothing than by a crime to seek an
opportunity for doing a duty. What should we think if a pilot should
pray to the gods for fierce tempests and storms in order that danger
might cause more esteem for his skill? What, if a general should beg
that a vast force of the enemy might surround his camp, fill the
trenches by a sudden charge, tear down the rampart around his
panic-stricken army, and plant its hostile standards in the very gates
- all in order that he might have greater glory in coming to the
rescue of his drooping and shattered fortunes?  All those who ask the
gods to injure those whom they themselves intend to help use odious
means to bring them benefits, and wish them to be laid low before they
raise them up.  To desire to injure one whom you cannot in all honour
fail to help is a sense of gratitude cruelly distorted.

"My prayer," you say, "does him no harm, because at the same time that
I wish for his danger I wish for his relief." What you mean is, not
that you do no wrong, but that you do less than if you were to wish
for his danger without wishing for his relief.  But it is wicked to
submerge a man in water in order that you may pull him out, to throw
him down in order that you may raise him up, to imprison him in order
that you may release him.  To end an injury is not a benefit, and
there is never any merit in removing a burden which the one who
removes it had himself imposed.  I would rather have you not wound me
than cure my wound.  You may gain my gratitude, not by wounding me in
order that you may have a chance to cure me, but by curing me because
I have been wounded.  There is never any pleasure in a scar except in
comparison with a wound, for, while we are glad that this has healed,
we would rather not have had it.  If you wished this to be the fortune
of one from whom you received a benefit, your desire would be cruel;
how much more cruel to wish it for one to whom you are indebted for a
benefit!

"I pray at the same time," you say,"that I may bring him aid." In the
first place - to stop you in the middle of your prayer - you at once
show yourself ungrateful; what you wish to bestow upon him I have not
yet heard, what you wish him to suffer I now know. You pray that
anxiety and fear and even some greater evil may befall him. You hope
that he may need help - this is to his disadvantage.  You hope that he
may need help from you - this is for your advantage.  You wish, not to
aid him, but to pay him; but one who shows such eagerness wishes, not
to pay, but to be freed from debt.  So the only part of your prayer
that might have seemed to be honourable is itself the base and
ungrateful feeling of unwillingness to remain under obligation; for
you hope, not that vou may have an opportunity of returning gratitude,
but that he may be under the necessity of imploring your help.  You
make yourself the superior, and force one who has done you a service
to grovel at your feet, which is wrong.  How much better would it be
to remain indebted with an honourable intention than to be released by
evil means!  You would be less guilty if you were to repudiate what
you had received; for his only loss would be what he had given.  But
as it is, you wish him to become subservient to you, by loss of his
property and change of social position to be reduced to the state of
being in a worse plight than his own benefits relieved.  Shall I count
you grateful?  Make your prayer in the hearing of the man whom you
wish to help!  Do you call that a prayer, in which a grateful friend
and an enemy might equally share, and which, if the last part were
unuttered, you would not doubt that an adversary and foe had made?
Even the enemy will sometimes hope to capture certain cities in order
to spare them, and to conquer certain men in order to pardon them, yet
these will not for that reason fail to be hostile desires, in which a
very great kindness is preceded by cruelty.  Finally, what sort of
prayers do you suppose those can be which no one will desire so little
to see fulfilled as he in whose behalf they are made?  You treat a man
very badly in wishing him to be injured by the gods, and you treat the
gods themselves unfairly in wishing him to be rescued by yourself; for
you assign a most cruel role to them, and a kindly one to yourself.
The gods must do him an injury in order that you may do him a service.
If you suborned someone to be his accuser, and then withdrew him, if
you entangled him in a lawsuit, and then suddenly quashed it, no one
would be in doubt about your baseness.  What difference does it make
whether you try. to accomplish your purpose by chicancry. or by
prayer, except that by prayer you summon against him adversaries that
are more powerful?  You have no right to say: "What harm, pray, do I
do him?" Your prayer is either futile or harmful, nay, harmful even if
it is in vain.  God is responsible for all that you fail to
accomplish, but all that you pray for is injury. Wishing is enough we
ought to be just as angry with you as if your wish were fulfilled.
"If my prayers," you say, "had had any power, they would also have had
power to bring you safety." In the first place, you desire for me
certain danger that is subject to uncertain succour.  Again, suppose
you consider both certain, the injury comes first.  Besides, while you
know the terns of your prayer, I have been caught in a storm, and am
doubtful of gaining the protection of a harbour.  Do you think what
torture it was to have needed help even if I received it?  To have
been panic- stricken even if I was saved?  To have pleaded my cause
even if I was acquitted? No matter how welcome the end of any fear may
be, firm and unshaken security is even more welcome.  Pray that it may
be in your power to repay my benefit when I shall need it, not that I
may need it.  If it were in your power, you would yourself have done
what you pray for.  How much more righteous would have been this
prayer!  "I pray that he may be in a position always to dispense
benefits, and never to need them; that he may be attended by the means
which he uses so generously in giving bounty and help to others; that
he may never have lack of benefits to bestow {Timon+} nor regret for
those bestowed; may his nature that of itself is inclined to pity,
kindness, and mercy find stimulus and encouragement from a host of
grateful persons, and may he be fortunate enough to find them without
the necessity of testing them; may none find him implacable, and may
he have need to placate none; may Fortune continue to bestow on him
such unbroken favour that it will be impossible for anyone to show
gratitude to him except by feeling it." How much more proper are such
prayers as these, which do not make you wait for an opportunity, but
show your gratitude at once! For what is there to prevent your
returning gratitude to a benefactor while his affairs are prosperous?
How many ways there are by which we may repay whatever we owe even to
the well-to-do! - loyal advice, {Kent+} constant intercourse, polite
conversation {Castiglione+} that pleases without flattery+, attentive
ears if he should wish to ask counsel, safe ears if he should wish to
be confidential, and friendly intimacy.  Good fortune has set no one
so high that he does not the more feel the want of a friend because he
wants for nothing.  This waiting for an opportunity is sorry business
- the thought is to be banished and utterly rejected from every
prayer. Must the gods show their anger before you can show gratitude?
Do you not understand that you are doing wrong from the very fact that
they treat better the one to whom you are ungrateful?  Set before your
mind the dungeon, chains, disgrace, slavery, war, poverty -these are
the opportunities for which you pray.  If anyone has had dealings with
you, it is through these that he gets his discharge!  Why do you not
wish, instead, that the man to whom you owe most may be powerful and
happy?  For, as I have said, what prevents your returning gratitude
even to those who are endowed with the utmost good fortune?  The
opportunities for doing this, you will find, are ample and varied.
What! do you not know that one can pay a debt even to a rich man? Nor
shall I censure vou if you are unwilling.  Yet, granted that a man's
wealth and success may shut you off from all gifts, I will show you
what the highest in the land stand in need of, what the man who
possesses everything lacks - someone, assuredly who will tell him the
truth, who will deliver from the constant cant and falsehood that so
bewilder him with lies that the very habit of listening to flatteries
instead of facts has brought him to the point of not knowing what
truth really is.  Do you not see how such persons are driven to
destruction by the absence of frankness and the substitution of
cringing obsequiousness for loyalty?  No one is sincere in expressing
approval or disapproval, but one person vies with another in flattery,
and, while all the man's friends have only one object, a common aim to
see who can deceive him most charmingly, he himself remains ignorant
of his own powers, and, believing himself to be as great as he hears
he is, he brings on wars that are useless and will imperil the world,
breaks up a useful and necessary peace, and, led on by a madness that
no one checks, sheds the blood of numerous persons, destined at last
to spill his own. While without investigation such men claim the
undetermined as assured, and think that it is as disgraceful to be
diverted from their purpose as to be defeated, and believe that what
has already reached its highest development, and is even then
tottering, will last for ever, they cause vast kingdoms to come
crashing down upon themselves and their followers.  And, living in
that gorgeous show of unreal and swiftly passing blessings, they
failed to grasp that from the moment when it was impossible for them
to hear a word of truth they ought to have expected nothing but
misfortune. {Lear_whole_plot+}

When Xerxes declared war on Greece, everyone encouraged his puffed-up
mind that had forgotten what slender reasons he had for confidence.
One would say that the Greeks could not even endure the announcement
of war, and would take to flight at the first rumour of his arrival;
another, that there was not the slightest doubt that with that vast
force Greece could be, not only conquered, but crushed; that there was
more need to fear that his army would find the cities abandoned and
empty, and that the headlong flight of the enemy would leave but a
vast wilderness in which his forces would have no chance to display
their strength.  Another would say that the world was scarcely big
enough to contain him, that the seas were too narrow for his fleets,
the camps for his soldiers, the plains for the manoeuvres of his
cavalry forces, and that the sky was scarcely wide enough to allow
every man to hurl his darts at once.  While much boasting of this sort
was going on around him, exciting the man, who had already too high
opinion of himself, to a frantic pitch, Demaratus, the Lacedaemonian,
alone told him that that very multitude, on which he congratulated
himself, disorganized and unwieldy as it was, was in itself a danger
to its leader, for that it had, not strength, but mere weight; that
forces that were too large could never be controlled, and that an army
that could not be controlled did not last long.  "The Lacedaemonians,"
he said, "will meet you on the first mountain, and immediately give
you a foretaste of their quality.  These countless thousands of
various nations will be held in check by three hundred men"; they will
stand.firmly at their post, they will defend the pass entrusted to
them with their arms, and block the way with their bodies; all Asia
will not drive them from their position; pitifully few as they are,
they will stop all this threatened invasion and the wild onrush of
almost the whole human race.  When Nature, changing her laws, has
allowed you to traverse the sea, you will be held up on a footpath,
and will be able to estimate your later losses when you have reckoned
the price the pass of Thermopylae cost you; when you have learned that
you can be checked, you will know that you can be routed. The Greeks
will retreat before you in many places as if swept away bv some
mountain torrent that in the first onrush descends with great terror;
then from this side and that they will rise against you, and crush you
by the might of your own forces.  What is commonly said is true - your
preparations for war are too great to find room in the country that
you mean to attack, but this fact is to our disadvantage.  Greece will
conquer you, for the very reason that she has no room for you; you
cannot use the whole of you. Besides, and in this lies your only hope
of victory, you will not be able to rush forward at the first attack,
and bear aid to your men if they yield, or to support and strengthen
their wavering ranks; you will have lost the victory long before you
know that you have been conquered.  However, you may well suppose that
your army will be able to hold out for the reason that not even its
leader knows its numbers; but there is nothing so large that it cannot
perish, and, though there may be no other agents, its very size gives
birth to the cause of its destruction." It all happened as Demaratus
had predicted.  And to him who assailed the works of man and God, and
removed whatever blocked his path, three hundred men cried, "Halt,"
and, when everywhere throughout the whole of Greece the Persian had
been laid low, he understood how great a difference there was betwee
<?> n a mob and an army!  And so Xerxes, made more unhappy by his
shame than by his loss, expressed his thanks to Demaratus because he
had been the only one to tell him the truth, and permitted him to ask
any reward he pleased.  That he asked was that he should be allowed to
enter Sardis, the largest city of Asia, riding in a chariot and
wearing a tiara erect upon his head, a privilege that was accorded
only to kings.  He had earned his reward before he asked for it, but
how pitiable the nation in which the only man who told the king the
truth was one who did not tell it to himself!

The deified Augustus banished his daughter/a who was shameless beyond
the indictment of shamelessness, and made public the scandals of the
imperial house - that she had been accessible to scores of paramours,
that in nocturnal revels she had roamed about the city, that the very
forum and the rostrum, from which her father had proposed a law
against adultery, had been chosen by the daughter for her
debaucheries, that she had daily resorted to the statue of Marsyas,/b
and, laying aside the role of adulteress, there sold her favours, and
sought the right to every indulgence with even an unknown paramour.

Carried away by his anger, he divulged all these crimes, which, as
emperor, he ought to have punished, and equally to have kept secret,
because the foulness of some deeds recoils upon him who punishes them.
Afterwards, when with the lapse of time shame took the place of anger,
he lamented that he had not veiled with silence matters that he had
not known until it was disgraceful to mention them, and often
exclaimed: "If either Agrippa or Maecenas had lived, none of this
would have happened to me!" So difficult was it for one who had so
many thousands of men to repair the loss of two!  When his legions
were slaughtered, others were at once enrolled; when his fleet was
wrecked, within a few days a new one was afloat; when public buildings
were swept away by fire, finer ones than those destroyed rose in their
place.  But the place of Agrippa and Maecenas remained empty all the
rest of his life.  What!  Am I to suppose that there were no more like
them who could take their place, or that it was the fault of Augustus
himself, because he chose rather to sorrow than to search for others?
There is no reason for us to suppose that Agrippa and Maecenas were in
the habit of speaking the truth to him; they would have been among the
dissemblers if they had lived.  It is a characteristic of the kingly
mind to praise what has been lost to the detriment of what is present,
and to credit those with the virtue of telling the truth from whom
there is no longer any danger of hearing it.  But, to return to my
subject, you see how easy it is to return gratitude to the prosperous
and those who have beep placed at the summit of human power.  Tell
them, not what they wish to hear, but what they will wish they had
always heard; sometimes let a truthful voice penetrate ears that are
filled with flatteries; give them useful advice. {Kent+} Do you ask
what you can bestow on a fortunate man?  Teach him not to trust his
felicity, let him know that it must be sustained by hands that are
many and faithful.  Will you not have conferred enough upon him if you
rob him of the foolish belief that his power will endure for ever, and
teach him that the gifts of chance soon pass, and depart with greater
speed than they come; that the descent from the summit of fortune is
not made by the same stages by which it was reached, but that often it
is only a step from the height of good fortune to ruin?{Lear+} You do
not know how great is the value of friendship if you do not understand
that you will give much to the man to whom you have given a friend,
something rare not only in great houses, but in the ages, something of
which there is nowhere a greater dearth than where it is supposed most
of all to abound. What!  Do you think that those lists, which a
nomenclator a can scarcely hold either in his memory or in his hand,
are the lists of friends?  Your friends are not those who, in a long
line, knock at your door, whom you distribute into the two classes of
those to be admitted first, and those to be second!

It is an old trick of kings and those who imitate kings to divide the
company of their friends into classes, and but a part of their
arrogance to count crossing, even touching, their threshold a great
privilege, and as an honour to grant you permission to sit nearer the
front door, and to be the first to set foot inside the house, in
which, in turn,, there are any other doors that will shut out even
those who have gained admittance.  With us, Gaius Gracchus and, a
little later, Livius Drusus were the first to set the fashion of
classifying their followers, and of receiving some in privacy, some in
company with others, and others en masse.  These men, consequently,
had chief friends, ordinary friends, never true friends.  Do you call
a man who must stand in line to receive your greeting a friend?  Or
can anyone possibly reveal loyalty to you who, through doors that are
opened grudgingly, does not so much enter as sneak in?  Can anyone
reach the point of even approaching to frankness when he must take his
turn simply to say "How do you do?", the ordinary and common term of
greeting universally used by strangers?  And so, whenever you go to
wait upon any of the men whose receptions upset the whole city, even
though you find the streets beset with a huge throng of people, and
the ways jammed with the crowds of those passing in both directions,
yet you may be sure that you are going to a place full of people, but
void of friends.  We must look for a friend, not in a reception hall,
but in the heart; there must he be admitted, there retained, and
enshrined in affection.  Teach a man this - and you show gratitude!
You have a poor opinion of yourself if you are useful to a friend only
when he is in distress, if you are unnecessary when fortune smiles.
As you conduct yourself wisely in doubtful, in adverse, and in happy
circumstances by exercising prudence in case of doubt, bravery in
adversity, and restraint in good fortune, so under all circumstances
you can make yourself useful to a friend.  In adversity do not abandon
him, {Kent+} but do not wish him misfortune; none the less, without
your wishing it, in the many and varied incidents of human life, many
things will befall him that will provide you with an opportunity of
displaying your lovalty.  As he who prays that another may have riches
in the hope that he may get a share of them, has an eye to his own
interests although he offers his prayer ostensibly for the benefit of
the other, so he who prays that a friend may have some dire need from
which he may rescue him by his help and loyalty, which is really the
wish of an ingrate, sets himself before his friend, and deems it worth
while that his friend should be wretched in order that he may show
himself grateful, for this very reason proves himself ungrateful; for
he wishes to get rid of a burden, and to free himself from a heavy
load.  It makes a great difference whether you hasten to return
gratitude in order that you may repay a benefit, or in order that you
may not be under obligation.  He who wishes to repay a benefit will
adjust himself to the convenience of his friend, and will hope for the
arrival of a suitable opportunity; he who only wishes to get rid of a
burden will be eager to accomplish this by any means whatever, which
is the worst sort of wish: "This haste," you say, "shows that one is
exceedingly grateful!" I cannot express the matter more clearly than
by repeating what I have said.  You wish, not to return, but to escape
from, a benefit.  You seem to say: "When shall I be rid of it?  I must
strive in every possible way to avoid being indebted to him." If you
wished to pay a debt to him with money from his own pocket, you would
appear to be very far from being grateful.  This which you do desire
is even more unjust; for you invoke curses upon him, and call down
terrible imprecations upon the head of one whom you hold sacred.  No
one, I suppose, would have any doubt about the cruelty of
your. intention if you openly invoked upon him poverty, or captivity,
or hunger and fear.  But what difference does it make whether that is
an uttered or a silent prayer?  For someone of these things you do
desire.  But go now and suppose that it is gratitude to do what not
even an ungrateful man would do, provided he confined himself to
repudiation of the benefit, and stopped short of hatred!

Who will say that Aeneas is righteous if he wished his native city to
be captured in order that he might rescue his father from captivity?
Who will point to the Sicilian youths/a as good models for children if
they had prayed that Aetna, all aglow and afire, might hurl forth a
huge volume of flame with unusual violence in order to give them an
opportunity of showing their devotion their parents by rescuing them
from the midst of the conflagration?  Rome owes nothing to Scipio if
he fostered the Carthaginian War in order that he might end it. She
owes nothing to the Decii/b for saving their city by dying if they
prayed beforehand that they might find in some desperate need of the
state an opportunity to show their heroic devotion.  It is a burning
disgrace for a physician to try to make practice.  Many who have
aggravated and augmented an illness in order that they may win greater
fame by curing it have not been able to banish it, or have conquered
it at the cost of great suffering on the part of their victims.

It is said (at any rate Hecaton tells this story) that, when
Callistratus/c was going into exile, forced into it along with many
others by his factious and outrageously lawless country, and heard
someone express the hope that dire necessity might force the Athenians
to recall the exiles, he cried God forbid such a return!" xxx Our
countryman Rutilius a showed even more spirit.  When someone tried to
console him by saying that civil war was threatening, and that in a
short time all exiles would be brought back, he replied: "What sin
have I committed that you should wish me a more unhappy return than
departure?  I should much prefer to have my country blush for my exile
than weep at my return!" The exile that causes no one less shame than
the victim is not exile at all.  But as these men maintained their
duty as good citizens in being unwilling to be restored to their homes
at the cost of a public disaster, because it was better that two
should suffer from undeserved misfortune than that all should suffer
from universal misfortune, so, in like manner, he does not maintain
the character of a grateful man who wishes that another, who has done
him a service, may be loaded with troubles in order that he himself
may remove them, because, even if his purpose is good, his desire is
evil. To put out a fire that you yourself have caused does not excuse
you - still less do you credit.  In some states an unholy prayer was
treated as a crime. At any rate, at Athens Demades/b won a suit
against a man who sold funeral requirements, by proving that he had
prayed for great gain, and that he could not have been successful
unless many persons had died.  Yet the question is often raised
whether he was rightly convicted.  Perhaps he prayed, not that he
might sell to many, but that he might sell at a good profit - that
what he would naturally sell might be bought cheaply. Since his
business consisted in buying and selling why do you restrict his
prayer to one side of the transaction when there was gain in both?
Besides, you might convict everyone who followed that business; for
they all wish, that is, secretly pray for, the same thing.  You will
have to convict, too, a great part of the human race, for who does not
derive, gain from another's distress?  The soldier, if he wants glory,
prays for war; the farmer is cheered by the high price of grain; a
number of lawsuits raise the price of eloquence; the doctor makes
money from an unhealthy season; the vender of sybaritic wares is
enriched by the corruption of youth; if no houses should be damaged by
storm or fire, the builder's trade will suffer.  One man's prayer was
detected, but, all make a similar prayer. Or do you suppose that
Arruntius and Haterius, and all the rest who have followed the
profession of hunting legacies, do not put up the same prayers that
funeral directors and undertakers make.  Yet these do not know whose
death it is that they are praying for, while the former long for the
death of their most intimate friends, from whom on account of
friendship they have most hope of a legacy.  No one's living causes
the latter any loss, while the former are worn out if a victim is slow
in dying; they pray, therefore, not only that they may receive what
they have earned by base servitude, but also that they may be released
from the burdensome tribute. There is no doubt, therefore, that these
pray more earnestly for that which convicted the Athenian, for whoever
is likely to profit them by dying injures them by living.  Yet the
prayers of all these men, while well known, are unpunished.  Lastly,
let every man examine himself let him retire into the secrecy of his
heart, and discover what it is that he has silently prayed for.  How
many prayers there are which he blushes to acknowledge, even to
himself!  How few that we could make in the hearing of a witness!

But not everything that is blameworthy is to be considered also a
crime, as, for instance, this prayer of a friend, which we are
considering, for, while his purpose was good, his method was evil, and
he fell into the very fault he was trying to avoid.  For he is
ungrateful while he hurries - to show his gratitude.  He prays aloud:
"May he fall into my power, may he need my influence, may it not be
possible for him to find safety, honour, or security without me, may
he be so unhappy that whatever I return to him will count as a
benefit." What the ears of the gods hear is: "May he be beset by
domestic intrigues which I alone shall be able to crush, may he be
assailed by a powerful and bitter enemy, by a hostile mob supplied
with arms, may he be hard pressed by a creditor, or by an informer."
See how just you are!  You would not have prayed for any of these
things if he had not given to you a benefit.  To say nothing of your
other more serious sin in returning the worst for the best, you are
certainly at fault in not waiting for the fitting time for each
particular action, for it is as wrong to anticipate this as to fall
behind it.  As a benefit ought not always to be accepted, so it ought
not in every case to be returned.  If you were to make return to me
though I did not need it, you would be ungrateful; how much more
ungrateful you are if you force me to need it!  Wait a while!  Why are
you unwilling to allow my gift to linger in your hands?  Why do you
resent being under obligation?  Why, as though you were dealing with a
sharp usurer, are you in such a hurry to square and close your
account?  Why do you want to make trouble for me?  Why do you turn the
gods against me?  If this is your way of making repayment, what would
you do if you were exacting repayment?

Above all, therefore, Liberalis, let us learn this - to rest easy
under the obligation from benefits, and to watch for opportunities of
returning them, not to manufacture them.  Let us remember that this
very eagerness to set oneself free at the first possible moment marks
one as ungrateful; for a man is not glad to repay a benefit that he is
unwilling to owe, and one that he is not willing to keep he counts,
not a gift, but a burden.  How much better and more seemly it is for a
man to keep in view the services of friends, and to offer, not to
obtrude, his own, and not to count himself a mere debtor; for a
benefit is a common bond and binds two persons together.  Say: "I make
no delay in returning what is yours; I hope you will gladly accept it.
If a cruel fortune threatens either of us, and some fate decrees
either that you must accept return of your benefit, or that I must
accept a second one, let him give by preference who is used to giving.
I am ready:

'Tis not for Turiius to delay./a This is the spirit I shall show
whenever the time comes; meanwhile the gods are my witnesses."

I have often observed in you, Liberalis, and, as it were, "laid hand
on" a feeling of nervous fear that you might be remiss in the
performance of any duty.  Anxiety ill becomes the grateful heart,
which, on the contrary; should show the utmost self-confidence and
that all worry has been banished because of the consciousness of true
love.  To say "Take back" casts as much reproach as to say "You owe."
Let this be the first rule in giving a benefit, that the right to
choose the time of having it returned is the giver's.  But you say: "I
am afraid that men will talk about me later." If a man is grateful,
not because of his conscience, but because of his reputation, his
motive is wrong.  You have in this matter two judges - your
benefactor, whom you ought not to fear, and yourself, whom you cannot
fear.  "What, then," you say, "if no opportunity comes?  Shall I
always remain in debt?" You will remain in debt, but openly in debt,
gladly in debt - you will view with great pleasure what has been left
in your hands.  A man who is irked at not having returned a benefit is
sorry that he received it.  Why, if you thought a man was worthy to
make you his debtor, do you think that he is unworthy of your
remaining long in debt?

Those who think that to proffer and to bestow and to fill many men's
pockets and houses with their gifts are proof of a great soul make a
great mistake, since sometimes these are due, not so much to a large
soul, as to a large fortune; {Timon+} they do not know how much
greater and more difficult it is at times to take, than to lavish,
gifts.  For, although I would not disparage either act, since both are
of equal value when Virtue directs them, to become indebted for a
benefit requires no smaller spirit than to give it; of the two, the
former, in fact, is the more laborious, as greater effort is expended
in guarding, than in giving, the objects that are received.  Therefore
we ought not to be worried over how soon we can repay, nor should we
rush to do so at an unseemly time, for he who hastens to return
gratitude at the wrong time is as much at fault as he who is remiss in
returning it at the proper time.  He has placed his gift in my hands;
I have no fear on his account or on my own.  He has good security; he
cannot lose his benefit unless he loses me, nay, not even if he loses
me.  I have paid him my thanks - that is, I have made return.  He who
thinks too much about returning a benefit must suppose that the other
thinks too much about having it returned.  One should lend himself to
both points of view.  If a man wishes his benefit to be returned, let
us repay and return it cheerfully; if he prefers that it should remain
in our custody, why do we dig up his treasure?  Why do we refuse to
guard it?  He deserves to be allowed to do whichever he pleases, As
for rumour and reputation, let us consider them as matters that must,
not guide, but follow, our actions.

BOOK VII

BE of good cheer, Liberalis

The land is close - I will not keep you long By rambling outbursts of
a long-drawn song./a This book gathers up the remnants, and, after the
subject has been exhausted, I am casting about to discover, not what I
shall say, but what I have not said.  If there is anything in it that
could be omitted, you will take it in good part, since it was for your
sake that I did not omit it.

If I had wished to curry favour for myself, I ought to have let my
work grow gradually in interest, and to have reserved for the last a
part that any reader would be eager for even if he were surfeited.
But all that is most essential I have massed together at the
beginning; now I am merely recovering whatever escaped me.  Nor,
seriously, if you ask me, do I think that, after stating the rules
that govern conduct, there is very much point in my pursuing the other
questions that have been raised, not to further the health of the
mind, but to provide exercise for the intellect.

For Demetrius the Cynic, a great man, in my opinion, even if compared
with the greatest, is fond of stating very admirably that it is far
better for us to possess only a few maxims of philosophy that are
nevertheless always at our command and in use, than to acquire vast
knowledge, that notwithstanding serves no practical purpose.  "Just
as," he says, "the best wrestler is not one who is thoroughly
acquainted with all the postures and grips of the art, which he will
seldom use against an adversary, but he who has well and carefully
trained himself in one or two of them, and waits eagerly for the
opportunity to use them - for it makes no difference how much he knows
if he knows, enough to give him the victory - , so in this effort of
ours there are many points that are interesting, few that are
decisive.  Though you may not know what principle causes the ebb and
flow of the ocean tides, why every seventh year leaves its mark on the
life of a man, why the width of a colonnade, when you look at it from
a distance, does not keep its true proportion, but towards the end
grows narrower, and at last the spaces between the columns disappear,
why it is that twins are conceived separately, but are born together,
whether in coition one act gives birth to two, or each is born from a
separate act, why those who are born together have different
destinies, and, though their births were very close together, are very
far apart in the differences of their experiences it will not do you
much harm to pass over matters which it is neither possible nor
advantageous for you to know. {Prospero+} Truth lurks in deep hiding
and is wrapped in mystery.  Nor can we complain that Nature is
grudgingly disposed towards us, for there is nothing that is hard to
discover except that which, when discovered, brings no other reward
than the fact of discovery; all that tends to make us better and
happier has been placed either in plain sight or nearby.  The soul
that can scorn all the accidents of fortune, that can rise superior to
fears, that does not greedily covet boundless wealth, but has learned
to seek its riches from itself; the soul that can cast out all dread
of men and gods, and knows that it has not much to fear from man and
nothing from God; that, despising all those things which, while they
enrich, harass life, can rise to the height of seeing that death is
not the source of any evil, but the end of many; the soul that can
dedicate itself to Virtue, and think that every path to which she
calls, is smooth; that, social creature that it is and born for the
common good, views the world as the universal home of mankind, that
can bare its conscience to the gods, and, respecting itself more than
all others, always live as if in the sight of men - such a soul,
remote from storms, stands on the solid ground beneath a blue sky, and
has attained to perfect knowledge of what is useful and essential.
All other matters are but the diversions of a leisure hour; for when
the soul has once found this safe retreat, it may also make excursions
into things that bring polish, not strength, to its
powers. {Stoicism_basic+}

These are the things that my friend Demetrius says the tiro in
philosophy must grasp with both hands, these are the precepts that he
must never let go, nay, must cling fast to, and make a part of
himself, and by daily meditation reach the point where these wholesome
maxims occur to him of their own accord, and are promptly at hand
whenever they are desired, and the great distinction between base and
honourable action presents itself without any delay.  Let him know
that there is no evil except what is base, and no good except what is
honourable.  Let him apply this rule to all the deeds of life; in
accordance with this law let him both order and weigh all his actions,
and those who are given over to gluttony and lust, whose minds are
deadened by sluggish inaction, let him judge to be the most wretched
of mortals, no matter how great the splendour of their wealth may be.
Let him say to himself: "Pleasure is frail, shortlived, and prone to
pall; the more eagerly it is indulged, the more swiftly it changes
into the opposite, it forces us straightway either to repentance or to
shame, it has in it nothing of nobility, nothing worthy of the nature
of man, second as he is to the gods, a lowly thing, produced by
subservience to the parts of our body that are either base or vile,
and in the end repulsive.{Lear_disgust+} True pleasure, worthy either
of man or hero, comes, not from filling and gorging the body and from
exciting the lusts that are safest when they are quiet, but from
freedom from all mental disturbance, both that which is aroused by the
ambition of men struggling with one another, and that which comes,
insufferably, from on high when we give credence to the stories of the
gods, and estimate them by the standard of our own vices." This is the
pleasure, constant, serene, always uncloyed, that is experienced by
the man we were just now delineating, one skilled, so to speak, in the
laws of gods and men.  Such a man rejoices in the present, and puts no
faith in the future; for he who leans upon uncertainties can have no
sure support. Free, therefore, from the great anxieties that rack the
mind, there is nothing which he hopes for or covets, and, content with
what he has, he does not plunge into what is doubtful. {Foresight+}

And do not suppose that he is content with a little - all things are
his, and not in the sense in which they were Alexander's, who,
although he stood upon the shore of the Indian Ocean, had need of more
territory than that he had passed through.  Nor did he own even the
kingdoms that he was holding or had conquered, while Onesicritus,/a
who had been sent ahead to discover new ones, was wandering about the
ocean and stirring up war on unknown seas.  Was it not quite clear
that it was a man in need who pushed his arms beyond the bounds of
Nature, who, driven on by reckless greed, plunged headlong into an
unexplored and boundless sea?  What difference does it make how many
kingdoms he seized, how many he bestowed, how many lands submitted to
tribute?  He still had need of as much as he still coveted.

Nor was this the vice of Alexander alone, whose successful audacity
led him to follow in the footsteps of Liber and Hercules, but of all
those whom Fortune has goaded on by rich gifts.  Consider Cyrus and
Cambyses/b and all the royal line of Persia.  Will you find any among
them who was satisfied with the bounds of his empire, who did not end
his life in some plan of advancing farther?  Nor need we wonder; for
whatever is gained by covetousness is simply swallowed up and buried,
nor does it make any difference how much you pour into a vessel that
can never be filled.

It is only the wise man who has all things, and has no difficulty in
retaining them.  He has no need to send legates across the seas, nor
to measure out camps on hostile shores, nor to place garrisons in
strategic forts - he has no need of a legion or squadrons of cavalry.
Like the immortal gods who govern their realm without recourse to
arms, and still from their serene and lofty heights safeguard their
own, so the wise man performs his duties, however far reaching they
may be, without any turmoil, and, being the most powerful and best of
mankind, sees the whole human race beneath him.  Smile though you may,
yet if you survey the East and the West with your thought, which can
penetrate even to lands that are far removed and shut off by vast
wastes, if you behold all creatures of earth, all the bounteous store,
which Nature so richly pours forth, it is the claim of no mean spirit
to be able to utter these words of God: "All these things are
mine!"{Wdswth+} {Satan+} Thus it comes that he covets nothing because
there is nothing outside of the all.

"This," you say, "is the very thing I wanted; I have caught you!  I
want to see how you will release yourself from this trap into which
you have fallen of your own accord.  Tell me this.  If the wise man
possesses everything, how can anyone possibly give anything to a wise
man?  For even what one gives to him is already his.  It is
impossible, therefore, to bestow a benefit on a wise man, for whatever
is given to him is given out of his own store; yet you Stoics say that
it is possible to give to a wise man.  Know, too, that I raise the
same question also with reference to friends.  You say that they have
all things in common; {Friend+ no one, consequently can give anything
to a friend; for he gives to him what is common property.

There is nothing to prevent a thing's belonging both to the wise man
and to him who actually possesses it as something that was granted and
assigned to him.  According to civil law everything belongs to the
king, and yet property, to which the king lays claim by his universal
right, is parcelled out to individual owners, and each separate thing
is someone's personal possession.  And so we are able to give to a
king a house, or a slave, or money, and are not said to be bestowing
upon him a gift of his own property; for the right of ownership of all
things belongs to the king, the actual ownership to the individual
citizen,

We speak of the territories of the Athenians and the Campanians,
which, in turn, the dwellers divide among themselves by private
agreements; and while the whole land is undoubtedly the property of
any commonwealth, each part of it in turn is reckoned as the
possession of its owner; and we are able, therefore, to present our
lands to the state, although they are said to belong to the state,
because, in one way, they are the state's, in another, mine.  Can
there be any doubt that a slave, along with his private savings,
belongs to his master?  Yet he can give a present to his master.  For
it is not true that a slave owns nothing for the mere reason that he
will not be able to own it if his master should be unwilling for him
to own it, nor is it true that he does not give a present, when he
gives it willingly, for the mere reason that it could have been seized
from him even if he had been unwilling, How can we prove everything?
For we are now both agreed that the wise man possesses all things; the
question that we must settle is how there can remain any means of
showing generosity to one to whom we have granted all things
belong. All things that are in the hands of his children belong to the
father; yet who does not know that even a son can make a gift to his
father?  All things belong to the gods; yet we both offer gifts to the
gods, and throw them alms./a It is not necessarily true that what I
have is not mine if what is mine is also yours; for it is possible
that the same thing may be both mine and yours.

"He to whom courtesans belong," you say, "is a pimp; but all things
belong to a wise man, and all things must also include courtesans;
therefore courtesans belong to a wise man.  But he to whom courtesans
belong is a pimp; therefore a wise man is a pimp." In the same way
they forbid him to buy anything, for they say: "No one buys his own
property; but all things belong to the wise man; therefore the wise
man buys nothing." In the same way they forbid him to take a loan,
because no one is going to pay interest for the use of his own money.
They raise endless quibbles, although they perfectly well understand
what we mean.  For I mean that, while all things belong to the wise
man, each person, nevertheless, has the ownership of his own property,
just as under the best sort of king everything belongs to the king by
his right of authority, and to his subjects by their individual rights
of ownership.  The time will come for proving this statement;
meanwhile the question in hand will be sufficiently answered if I say
that it is possible for me to give to the wise man something that, in
one way, belongs to the wise man, and, in another way, belongs to
me. Nor is it surprising that it is possible to give something to one
who possesses all there is.  Suppose I have rented a house from you;
you still have some "right" in it, and I have some right - the
property is yours, the use of the property is mine.  Nor, likewise,
will you touch crops, although, they may be growing on your own
estate, if your tenant objects; and if the price of corn becomes too
dear, or you are starving, you will

Alas! in vain another's mighty store behold,/a grown upon your own
land, lying upon your own land, and about to be stored in your own
granary.  Nor, although you are the owner, will you set foot on what I
have rented, nor will you take away a slave of yours, now a hireling
of mine; and if I have hired a carriage from you, you will be
receiving a benefit if I permit you to sit in your own vehicle.  You
see, therefore, that it becomes possible for someone to receive a
present by receiving what is his own.  In all these cases that I have
just cited there are two owners of one and the same thing.  How is it
possible?  Because one is the owner of the thing, the other of the use
of the thing.  We say that certain books are Cicero's; Dorus, the
bookseller, calls these same books his own, and both statements are
true.  The one claims them, because he wrote them, the other because
he bought them; and it is correct to say that they belong to both, for
they do belong to both, but not in the same way.  So it is possible
for Titus Livius to receive his own books as a present, or to buy them
from Dorus.  Although all things belong to a wise man, yet I am able
to give to him what is individually mine; for, although he is
conscious of possessing all things in the manner of a king, yet the
ownership of the several things is divided among individuals, and it
is possible for him to receive a present and to be indebted and to buy
and to hire.  Everything belongs to Caesar, yet the only private and
personal property he has is the imperial treasury; all things are his
by right of his authority, but his personal property is acquired by
right of inheritance.  The question may be raised as to what is his,
and what is not his, without assailing his authority; for even that
which the court may decide belongs to another, from another point view
belongs to him.  So in his mind the wise man possesses all things, by
actual right and ownership only his own things.

Bion/a at one time proves by argument that all men are sacrilegious,
at another, that no one is.  When he is disposed to hurl all men from
the Tarpeian Rock, he says: "Whoever abstracts and consumes and
appropriates to his own use what belongs to the gods, commits
sacrilege; but all things belong to the gods; that which anyone
abstracts, therefore, he abstracts from the gods, to whom all things
belong; consequently, whoever abstracts anything commits sacrilege."
Again, when he bids men to break into temples and to pillage the
Capitol without fear of punishment, he says that no one commits
sacrilege, because whatever is abstracted from one place that belongs
to the gods is transferred to another place that belongs to the gods.

The answer to this is that, while it is true that all things belong to
the gods, all things are not consecrated to the gods, and that only in
the case of the things that religion has assigned to a divinity is it
possible to discover sacrilege.  That thus, also, the whole world is
the temple of the gods, and, indeed, the only one worthy of their
majesty and grandeur, and yet that there is a distinction between
things sacred and profane; that not all things which it is lawful to
do under the open sky and in the sight of the stars are lawful to do
in the nook to which has been assigned the name of a sanctuary.  The
sacrilegious man is not able, indeed, to do any injury to God, whose
own divinity has placed him beyond the reach of harm, yet he is
punished because he aimed an injury at God - he is subjected to
punishment by our feeling and his own.  As, therefore, he who carries
off something sacred seems to have cornmitted a sacrilege, even if the
place to which he has transferred what he had stolen is within the
limits of the world, so it is possible for a theft to be committed
upon even a wise man, for he will be robbed of something, taken, not
from that universe which he possesses, but from the things of which he
is the registered owner, and which are at his individual service.  He
will claim his ownership of the former, ownership of the latter he
will be unwilling to have even if he is able, and will give voice to
the famous words that a Roman general uttered when, as a reward for
his prowess and his good service to the state, he was being awarded as
much land as he could have covered in one day's ploughing; "You have
no need," said he, "of a citizen who needs to have more than is
necessary for one citizen." How much more a hero will you think him
for having rejected this gift than for having deserved it!  For many
have removed the boundary lines of other men's lands, no one has set
limits to his own!  When, therefore, we behold the mind of the wise
man, master as it is of all things and a ranger of the universe, we
say that all things belong to him, although, according to our
every-day law, his only assessment, it may be, will be a head-tax.  It
makes a great difference whether his holdings are estimated by the
censor's register, or by the greatness of his mind.  He will pray to
be delivered from the ownership of all the things of which you speak.

I shall not remind you of Socrates, of Chrysippus, of Zeno, and the
others, truly great men - in fact, too great, because envy sets no
bounds to our praise of the ancients.  But a little while ago I
reminded you of Demetrius, whom, it seems to me, Nature produced in
these times of ours in order to prove that he could not be corrupted
even by us, and that we could not be reproved even by him - a man of
consummate wisdom, though he himself disclaimed it, of steadfast
firmness in all his purposes, of an eloquence fitted to deal with the
mightiest subjects, not given to graces, nor finical about words, but
proceeding to its theme with great spirit, as impulse inspired
it. {PlainDealer+} I doubt not that this man was endowed by divine
providence with such a life, with such power of speech in order that
our age might not lack either a model or a reproach. If some god
should wish to commit all our wealth to the hands of Demetrius on the
fixed condition that he should not be allowed to give it away, I am
ready to assert that he would refuse it, and say: "Really, I cannot be
bound down by this inextricable burden, nor, unhampered as I now am,
do I mean to be dragged down to the dregs of existence.  Why do you
offer to me what is the bane of all peoples?  I would not accept it
even if I intended to give it away, for I see many things that are not
fit for me to bestow.  I wish to set clearly before myself the things
that blind the eyes of nations and kings, I wish to behold the
recompenses for your life-blood and your lives.  Array before me first
the trophies of Luxury, spreading them out in a row, if you wish, or,
as is better, piling them into one heap.  I see there the shell of the
tortoise, a most ugly and sluggish creature, bought for huge sums and
embellished with elaborate markings, and the very variety of their
colours, which is their chief attraction, is accentuated by the
application of dyes that resemble the natural tint. I see there tables
of wood, valued at the price of a senatorial fortune,/a and the more
knotted the contortions of the unhappy tree, the more precious/b it
is.  I see there objects of crystal, whose very fragility enhances
their price; for to the ignorant mind, the pleasure of all things is
increased by the very risk that ought to drive pleasure away.  I see
there murrine cups/c - men, forsooth, would pay too little for their
luxury unless, when they toasted each other, they had precious stones
to hold the wine they will vomit up!  I see pearls - not single ones
designed for each ear, but clusters of them, for the ears have now
been trained to carry their load; they are joined together in pairs,
and above each pair still others are fastened; feminine folly could
not sufficiently have overwhelmed men unless two or three fortunes had
hung in each ear!  I see there raiments of silk - if that can be
called raiment, which provides nothing that could possibly afford
protection for the body, or indeed modesty, so that, when a woman
wears it, she can scarcely, with a clear conscience, swear that she is
not naked.  These are imported at vast expense from nations unknown
even to trade, in order that our married women may not be able to show
more of their persons, even to their paramours, in a bedroom than they
do on the street.  And how, O Avarice, dost thou fare?  How many are
the things that in costliness have surpassed thy gold!  All those that
I have mentioned are more honoured and valued.  Now I wish to review
thy wealth, the plates of gold and silver, for which our greed gropes
in darkness.  Yet in very truth, the earth, which has revealed
everything that was likely to be of use to us, has hidden these
things, and buried them deep, and weighted them down with all her
mass, regarding them as harmful substances, destined to be a curse to
the nations if brought forth into the light.  I see that iron has been
brought forth from the same dark depths that yielded gold and silver
in order that we might not lack either the instrument or the reward
for slaughtering one another.  And yet the forms of thy wealth, so
far, have some actual substance; but there is another in which the
mind and the eye alike can be deceived.  I see there allotments,
bonds, and securities - the empty phantoms of ownership, the secret
haunts of Avarice devising some means by which she may deceive the
mind that delights in empty fancies.  For what are these things, what
are interest and the account-book and usury, but the names devised for
unnatural forms of human greed? {Shylock+}

"I might make complaint against Nature because she did not hide gold
and silver more deeply, because she did not lay a weight upon them too
heavy to be removed - but these bills of thine, what are they? what
the computations and the sale of time and the blood-thirsty twelve per
cent?  Evils that we will, that originate from our own character, that
have in them nothing which can be put before the eyes, nothing that
can be held in the hand - the mere dreams of empty Avarice!  Wretched,
indeed, is he who can take delight in the huge record of his estate,
in his vast tracts of land that need to be tilled by men in chains, in
huge herds and flocks that need whole provinces and kingdoms to
provide them with pasture, and in private palaces that cover more
ground than great cities!  When he has carefully reviewed all his
wealth, in what it is invested and on what it is squandered, and is
puffed up with pride, let him compare all that he has with what he
still covets, and he is a poor man!  Let me go - restore me to the
riches that are mine.  I know the kingdom of wisdom, a mighty, a
secure kingdom - I possess all in the sense that all things belong to
all!" And so, when Gaius Caesar wanted to give Demetrius two hundred
thousand, he laughingly refused it, not even deeming it a sum the
refusal of which was worth boasting about!  Ye gods and goddesses,
what a petty mind Gaius showed in trying either to compliment or to
corrupt him!  I must here render testimony to the distinction of the
man.  I heard him say a fine thing when be expressed surprise at the
madness of Gaius in supposing that he could have been influenced by
such an amount.  "If he meant to tempt me," said he, "he ought to have
tested me by offering me his whole kingdom." xxx It is possible,
consequently, to bestow a gift on a wise man even if all things belong
to the wise man.  And, just as truly, there is nothing to prevent my
making a gift to a friend, although we say that friends have all
things in common.  For I have all things in common with my friend, not
as I would with a partner, when one share would belong to me, and
another to him, but as children are the common possession of their
father and mother, who, if they have two, do not each claim one, but
they each claim two.

First of all, I shall now proceed to show that every man who invites
me to enter into partnership with him, knows well that he possesses
nothing in common with me.  And why ?  Because this community of goods
{common_property+} can exist between wise men only, who alone are
capable of knowing friendship; the rest are just as little friends as
they are partners.

In the second place, there are many ways of owning things in common.
The seats reserved/a for the knights belong to all the Roman knights -
yet of these the seat that I have occupied becomes my own property,
and, if I surrender it to anyone, I am supposed to have given him
something although I have only surrendered to him what was common
property.  Certain things belong to certain persons under particular
conditions. I have a seat among the knights, not to sell, not to let,
not to dwell in, but to use only for the purpose of viewing the
spectacle.  Therefore I am not speaking an untruth when I say that I
have a seat in the equestrian rows.  But, if the equestrian rows are
full when I enter the theatre, I both have a right to a seat there,
because I have the privilege of sitting there, and have not a right,
because the seat is occupied by those who have with me a common right
to the space.  Consider that the same relation exists between friends.
Whatever our friend possesses is common to us, but it is the property
of the one who holds it; I cannot use the things against his will.
"You are making fun of me," you say; "if what belongs to my friend is
mine, I have a right to sell it." Not so; for you have no right to
sell the equestrians' seats, and yet they belong to you in common with
the other knights.  The fact that you cannot sell something, or
consume it, or alter it for the better or worse is, in itself, no
proof that it does not belong to you; for something that is yours
under particular conditions is nevertheless yours. . . . /a I have
received, but at any rate not less.  Not to prolong the discussion, a
benefit cannot be more than a benefit; but the means employed to
convey a benefit may be both greater and more numerous - the things in
which, in short, one's benevolence runs riot, and indulges itself as
lovers are wont to do, for these by their more numerous kisses and
closer embraces do not increase their love, but give it play.

This other question, which now comes up, has been exhausted in the
earlier books, and will, therefore, be touched upon briefly; for the
arguments that have been given for other cases may be transferred to
this.  The question is, whether anyone who has done everything in his
power to return a benefit has returned it.  "You may be sure," you
say, "that he has not returned it, for he did everything in his power
to return it; it is evident, therefore, that he did not accomplish his
purpose if he failed to find opportunity for its accomplishment.  And
a man does not discharge his debt to a creditor if he searches
everywhere for money in order to be able to discharge it, and yet has
not found it." Some efforts are of such a character that they are
bound to achieve their end; in the case of others, to have tried in
every way to achieve an end takes the place of achievement.  If a
physician has made every effort to effect a cure, he has performed his
part; the pleader, if he has used all the power of his eloquence,
fulfils his duty even if his client is convicted; praise for his
generalship is bestowed even upon a vanquished commander if he has
performed his duties with prudence, with diligence, and with bravery.
A man has made every effort to return your benefit, but your good
fortune stood in his way; no hardship befell you which could put his
true friendship to the test; he could not give to you when you were
rich, nor sit at your bedside when you were not sick, nor succour you
when you had no misfortune - this man has repaid gratitude even if you
have not received the return of your benefit.  Moreover, he who is
always intent upon this, is on the watch for an opportunity of doing
it, and expends upon it much thought and much anxiety, has taken more
trouble than one who has had the good fortune to repay his gratitude
quickly.  Quite different is the case of the debtor, for it is not
enough for him to have sought for the money unless he pays it; for in
his case a harsh creditor stands over him, who suffers not a single
day to pass without charging him interest; in your case there is a
very generous friend, who, if he saw you rushing about and troubled
and anxious, would say:

"This trouble from thy breast expel/a; cease to cause yourself
concern.  I have all that I want from you; you do me an injustice if
you suppose that I desire from you anything further; your intention
has reached me most fully."

"Tell me," you say: "if he had returned the benefit, you would say
that he has shown gratitude; are both, therefore, in the same position
- the one who did not retyrn it?"
 
On the other hand, consider this. If he had forgotten the benefit he
had received, if he had not even tried to be grateful, you would say
that he had not shown gratitude.  Yet this other man has worn himself
out night and day, and, neglecting all his other duties, has
concentrated on this single one, and has taken pains not to let any
opportunity escape him.  Will, therefore, he who has put aside all
concern about showing gratitude and he who has never ceased to be
concerned be considered in the same class?  You are unjust if you
require me to pay in fact when you see that I have not failed in
intention.  In short, suppose, when you had been taken captive, that
I, having borrowed money, and having made over my property to my
creditor as security, set sail along shores infested with pirates in
the midst of winter with all its fierceness, and traversed all the
perils that even a peaceful sea can offer; that, having wandered,
through all wildernesses, in search of men from whom every one else
was fleeing, I at last reached the pirates, and found that someone
else had ransomed you - will you say that I have not repaid gratitude?
Even if, during that voyage, I was shipwrecked, and lost the money
that I had raised to rescue you, even if I myself have fallen into the
chains which I hoped to remove from you, will you say that I have not
repaid gratitude? No, by the gods! - the Athenians call Harmodius and
Aristogiton/a "tyrannicides," and the hand that Mucius/b left on the
enemy's altar was as glorious as if it had killed Porsina, and the
valour that struggles against fortune always wins lustre even if it
fails to accomplish the task set before it.  He who pursues
opportunities that elude him, and clutches at them one after another
in order that he may be able to have the means of showing his
gratitude, renders far more than he who without strenuous effort
proves himself grateful at the first opportunity.

" But," you say, "your benefactor bestowed on you two things, his
property and his goodwill; you, likewise, owe him two." You might say
this very properly to one who returns to you goodwill without further
effort, but you cannot say it to one who both wishes and makes effort,
and leaves nothing untried; for, so far as it is in his power, he
bestows on you both.  Again, it is not always desirable to pit number
against number; sometimes one thing has the value of two; and so such
ardent and eager desire to repay takes the place of repayment.  And,
if the intention without a material offering has no value in repaying
gratitude, no one shows himself grateful to the gods, to whom the only
contribution that we make is goodwill.  "We cannot," you say, " bestow
anything else on the gods." But, if I am also unable to bestow
anything else on a man to whom I ought to return gratitude, why is it
that the only means that I have of showing my gratitude to the gods
does not permit me to show myself grateful to a man?

If, however, you ask me what I think, and wish me to set my seal on
the reply, I should say that the one should consider that he has
received the return of his benefit, while the other should know that
he has not returned it; the one should release the other, while the
other should feel himself bound; the one should say, "I have
received," the other, "I still owe." In the case of every question,
let us keep before us the public good; the door must be closed to all
excuses, to keep the ungrateful from taking refuge in them and using
them to cover their repudiation of the debt.  "I have done all in my
power," says he.  Well, keep on doing so. Tell me, do you suppose that
our forefathers were so foolish as not to understand that it was most
unjust to consider a man who wasted in debauchery or gambling the
money he had received from a creditor to be in the same class with one
who lost the borrowed property along with his own in a fire, or by
robbery, or some other major mishap?  Yet they accepted no excuses in
order to teach men that a promise must be kept at all costs; in their
eyes it was better that a few should not find even a good excuse
accepted than that all should resort to excuse.  You have done
everything in order to make return; this should be enough for your
benefactor, it should not be enough for you.  For, just as he is
unworthy of being repaid with gratitude if he permits all your earnest
and diligent effort to pass as nothing, so, if anyone accepts your
goodwill as full payment, you are ungrateful if you are not all the
more eager to acknowledge your indebtedness because he has released
you.  Do not snatch up your releaser nor demand witnesses; no whit the
less should you seek opportunities for making full return. Return to
one because he demands repayment, to another because he releases you
from the debt; to the former, because he is bad, to the latter,
because he is good.

There is, consequently, no reason why you should suppose that you have
any concern with the question of whether a man ought to return the
benefit that he has received from a wise man if he has ceased to be
wise and has turned into a bad man.  For you would return a deposit
that you had received from a wise man even if he had become bad, you
would return a loan.  What reason is there why you should not return a
benefit also?  Because he has changed, should he change you?  Tell me,
if you had received anything from a man when he was well, would you
not return it to him if he were sick, seeing that a friend's weakness
always increases our obligation to him?  This other also is sick - but
in his mind; we should help him, and bear with him.  The mind's
illness is folly.

In order that the matter may become more intelligible, I think that
here I ought to make a distinction.  Benefits are of two kinds - one,
the perfect and true benefit, which only a wise man can give to none
but a wise man; the other, the everyday, common sort, in which we
ignorant men have dealings with each other.  With regard to the
latter, there is no doubt that I ought to make return to the giver, no
matter what sort of a man he may be, whether he has turned out to be a
murderer or a thief or an adulterer.  Crimes have their appointed
laws; let such men be reformed rather by a judge than by the
ingrate. {judge_not+} Let no man make you bad because he is.  To a
good man I shall hand back his benefit, to a bad one I shall fling it
back; to the former, because I am indebted to him, to the latter, in
order that I may no longer be indebted to him. With regard to the
other kind of benefit, a question arises, for, if I could not have
received the benefit unless I had been a wise man, neither can I
return it to the giver unless he is a wise man.  For you say :
"Suppose that I do return it - he is not able to take it have
returned; I owe protection to a benefit that has been received, not to
one that has been returned.  While it is in my hands, it must be kept
safe; but I must give it back when he demands it even if it escapes
from his hands as he takes it.  To a good man I shall make return when
it is convenient; to a bad man, when he asks for it.

"You cannot," you say, "return to him the same sort of benefit that
you received; for you received it from a wise man, you are returning
it to a fool." No; I am returning to him the sort that he is now able
to receive, and it is not my fault if that which I shall return is
inferior to what I received, but the fault lies with him, and if he is
restored to wisdom, I shall return the sort that I received; while he
lingers in evil, I shall return the sort that he is able to receive.

"Tell me," you say, "if he has become, not only bad, but savage, even
ferocious, like Apollodorus or Phalaris, will you return even to such
a man a benefit that you had received?" {Timon+} Nature does not
permit a wise man to suffer so great a change.  A man does not fall
from the best state into the worst; even a bad man must necessarily
retain some traces of good; virtue is never so wholly extinguished as
not to leave upon the mind indelible imprints that no change can ever
erase. Wild beasts that have been bred in captivity, if they escape
into the forests, retain something of their earlier tameness, and are
as far removed from the most peaceful beasts as they are from those
that have always been wild and have never submitted to the hand of
man.  No one who has ever adhered to wisdom can fall into the depths
of wickedness; its colour is too deeply fixed to be able to fade
altogether from his mind and to take on the hue of evil.

In the second place, I ask you whether the man you are thinking of is
ferocious in spirit only, or whether he bursts forth into acts of
public violence?  You have cited the cases of Phalaris and another
tyrant, but if, while an evil man possesses their nature, he keeps it
concealed, why should I not return to him his benefit in order that
there may be no further bond between him and me?  If, however, he not
only delights in human blood, but feeds upon it; if also he exercises
his insatiable cruelty in the torture of persons of all ages, and his
frenzy is the result, not of anger, but of a certain delight in
cruelty; if he butchers children before the eyes of their parents; if,
not content with simply killing his victims, he tortures them, and not
only burns, but roasts, them to death; if his castle is always wet
with freshly shed blood -then not to return a benefit to him is too
small a thing!  For whatever the tie that bound him to me, it has been
severed by his breach of the common bond of humanity. {common_bond+}
If he had bestowed something upon me, and yet bore arms against my
country, he would have lost all claim upon me, and it would be
considered a crime to repay him with gratitude.  If he does not assail
my country, but is the bane of his own, and, while he keeps aloof from
my own people, harrows and rends his own, nevertheless, even if such
depravity does not make him my personal enemy, it makes him hateful to
me, and regard for the duty that I owe to the whole human race is, in
my eyes, more primary and more pressing than the duty I owe to a
single man. {common_bond+}
 
But, although this be so -, although I am free to act as I please
toward him, from the moment when by violating all law he put himself
beyond the pale of the law, I shall think that I ought to observe
moderation, as follows.  If my benefit to him is likely neither to
increase his powers to work general harm, nor to strengthen what he
already has, if, too, it shall be of such a character that it can be
returned to him without being disastrous to the state, then I shall
return it.  I shall be willing to save the life of his infant son -
for what harm can this benefit do to any of those whom he tortures
with his cruelty? - but I shall not supply him with money to maintain
his bodyguard. If he desires marbles and raiments, these trappings of
his luxury will do nobody any harm; but I shall not furnish him with
soldiers and arms. If, as a great boon, he asks for stage-players and
prostitutes and things that will soften {Paris+} his fierce nature, I
shall gladly present them. I would not send to him triremes and
bronze-beaked ships,/a but I should send pleasure- boats and yachts
and the other playthings of kings who indulge in sport on the sea.
And if his sanity should be despaired of, with the hand that returns a
benefit/b to him, I shall bestow one on all men; since for such
characters the only remedy is death, and, if a man will probably never
return to his senses, it is best for him to depart.  But so rare is
such a degree of wickedness that it is always regarded as a portent -
as much so as the yawning of the earth and the bursting forth of fires
from the caverns of the sea.  So let us leave it, and talk of vices
that we can detest without shuddering.

As for the type of bad man that I can find in any market- place, who
is feared, but only by individuals, I shall return to him the benefit
that I have received.  It is not right that I should profit by his
wickedness; let me return what is not mine to its owner.  What
difference does it make whether he is good or bad?  But I would sift
out that matter most carefully if I were giving, not returning, a
benefit.  This point calls up a story.  A certain Pythagorean once
bought some white shoes/a from a cobbler, a fine pair, without paying
for them in cash.  Some days later he returned to the shop in order to
make payment, and, after he had been knocking for a long time at the
closed door, someone appeared, and said: "Why do you waste your time?
The Cobbler you are looking for passed away, and has been cremated;
this is, perhaps, a grief to us, who believe that we lose our friends
for ever, but not to you, who know that they will be reborn," jeering
at the Pythagorean./b But our philosopher, not unwillingly, carried
his three or four denarii back home, shaking them now and then in his
hand.  Later, after blaming himself for the secret pleasure he had had
from not paying the money, and perceiving that he had derived
satisfaction from his trifling gain, he returned to the same shop,
saying to himself: "For you the man is alive, pay him what you owe."
Thereupon, he dropped the four coins into the shop, thrusting them
through the closed door by means of a crack in the joining, and
exacted punishment of himself for his unconscionable greed in order
that he might not form the habit of being in debt.

Try to find someone to whom you can pay what you owe, and, if no one
demands it, do you dun yourself.  It is no concern of yours whether
the man is good or bad; first pay, then accuse.  You have forgotten
how your several duties have been divided - for him forgetfulness is
enjoined, for you we have decreed remembrance.  Yet it is a mistake to
suppose that, when we say that the man who has given a benefit ought
to forget, we would rob him of all memory of his act, especially if it
was a very honourable one.  We overstate some rules in order that in
the end they may reach their true value.  When we say: "He must not
remember," we really mean: "He must not babble, nor boast+, nor give
offence." For some men in all gatherings tell of a benefit that they
have given; talk of it when they are sober, make no secret of it when
they are drunk, force it upon strangers, confide it to friends.  It is
to quell this excessive and reprehensible consciousness of it that we
have said that the man who gives must forget, and, by ordering
something more than he is able to accomplish, have commended to him
silence.

Whenever you lack confidence in those to whom you are giving orders,
you should demand of them more than is necessary in order that they
may perform all that is necessary.  The set purpose of all hyperbole
is to arrive at the truth by falsehood.  And so when the poet said:

Whose whiteness shamed the snow, their speed the winds,/a he stated
what could not possibly be true in order to give credence to all that
could be true.  And the other who said: Firmer than a rock, more
headlong than the stream,/b did not suppose that he could convince
anyone by this that any person was as immovable as a rock.  Hyperbole
never expects to attain all that it ventures, but asserts the
incredible in order to arrive at the credible. When we say: "Let him
who gives a benefit forget it," we mean: "Let him seem to have
forgotten it; let not his memory of it appear or obtrude." When we say
that we ought not to demand the repayment of a benefit, we do not
banish every demand for repayment; for bad men often need to be
dunned, even good men to be reminded.  What, then?  Am I not to point
out an opportunity to one who is not aware of it?  Am I not to reveal
my own wants?  Why should anyone have the chance to deny or be sorry
that he did not know of them?  Sometimes we may venture to remind, but
modestly, with no air of making a demand or of claiming a legal right.

Socrates once said in the hearing of his friends: "I would have bought
a cloak, if I had had the money." He asked from no one, he reminded
all.  Rivalry sprang up as to who should be allowed to give it to him.
Why should there not have been?  For how small a thing it was that
Socrates was receiving!  But to have been the one from whom Socrates
received was a great thing.  Could he have upbraided them more gently?
"I would have bought a cloak," he said, "if I had had the money."
After this, whoever made haste to give, gave too late; he had already
failed in duty to Socrates.  Because some men are harsh in demanding
repayment, we forbid it, not in order that the demand may never be
made, but that it may be made sparingly.

Once when Aristippus/a was enjoying the odour of a perfume, he cried:
"Curses upon these effeminate fellows who have cast discredit on so
nice a thing!" So, too, we should exclaim: "Curses upon these un
conscionable and importunate magnifiers of their benefits who have
banished so nice a thing as the right of one friend to remind
another!" I, however, shall make use of this privilege of friendship,
and I shall ask the return of a benefit from anyone from whom I would
have asked a benefit, who will be ready to accept as a second benefit
the opportunity of returning the first.  Not even when complaining of
him would I ever say

Needy I found him, a wretch, cast up on the shore And, cool, the half
of my kingdom I made his store./a This is not to remind, but to
reproach; this is to make a benefit hateful, this is to give a man
either the right, or the pleasure, of being ungrateful. It would be
enough, and more than enough, to refresh his memory with the gentle
and friendly words: If I to you by aught have help or pleasure
brought/b and he, in turn, would say: "Brought me help? 'Needy you
found me, a wretch, cast up on the shore!'"

"But," you say, "if we gain nothing; if he dissembles if he forgets -
what ought I to do?" You now bring up the very pressing question,
which will fittingly complete our subject, of how we are to deal with
the ungrateful.  I answer, deal calmly, gently, magnanimously. Never
let anyone's discourtesy, forgetfulness, and ingratitude offend you so
much that you will not, after all, be glad that you gave; never let
the injustice of it drive vou into saying "I wish that I had not done
it."  You should find pleasure even in the mischance of your benefit;
the ingrate will always regret it if you do not even now egret it!
There is no reason why you should be exasperated as if something
strange had happened; you ought rather to have been surprised if it
had not happened. One balks at the trouble, another at the expense,
another at the danger, another is deterred by false shame, since
returning the benefit would be an admission that he had received it,
another by ignorance of his duty, another by laziness, another by the
engrossments of business.  See how greedy are men's desires and always
asking for more!  You need not wonder that no one makes return in a
world where no one is satisfied.  Who of men is of so firm and
dependable a mind that you can safely deposit your benefits with him?
{motives_list+} One is crazed by lust, another is the slave of his
belly; another is wholly engrossed with gain and considers, not the
means, but the amount, of it; another struggles with envy, another
with blind ambition that drives him to the sword.  Consider, too,
mental sluggishness and senility, and opposed to them, the perpetual
turmoil and commotion of the restless heart.  Consider, too, excessive
self-esteem and swollen pride in the things for which a man should be
despised.  And what shall I say of the obstinate persistence in
wrongdoing, what of the fickleness that is always leaping from one
thing to another?  Add to these the headlong rashness, the fear that
is never ready to give faithful counsel, and the thousand errors in
which we are entangled the audacity of the greatest of cowards, the
discord of the greatest of friends, and the universal evil of trusting
in everything that is most uncertain, and of disdaining the
possessions that once we had no hope of ever being able to attain.  In
the company of the most restless passions do you hope to find that
calmest of qualities, good faith+?

If a true picture of our life should be flashed before your mind, you
would think that you were seeing the representation of a city that had
just been stormed, in which all regard for decency and right had been
abandoned and only force holds sway, as if the word had gone out to
cause universal confusion.  Fire is not idle, the sword is not idle;
all crime is free from the law; not even religion, which has protected
its suppliants in the midst of a hostile invasion, affords any check
upon those rushing to seize plunder.  This one strips a private house,
this one a public building, this one a sacred place, this one a place
profane; this one breaks down, this one leaps over; this one, not
content with a narrow path, overthrows the very walls that block his
way, and reaches his booty over ruins; one ravages without murdering,
another bears his spoils in a hand stained with blood; everyone
carries off something that belongs to another.

O! you have too easily forgotten the common lot, if, in this greed of
the human race, you seek to find among these plunderers even one who
brings back!  If you are indignant that men are ungrateful, be
indignant that they are sybaritic, indignant that they are greedy,
indignant that they are shameless, indignant that the sick are
unsightly, that the old are pale!  This is, indeed, a heinous vice, it
is intolerable - one that sets men at variance, that rends and
destroys the harmony {social_glue+} which props our human weakness,
but it is so common {nobody's_perfect+} that not even he who complains
of it escapes it.  Ask your secret soul whether you have always repaid
gratitude to those to whom you owed it, whether no one's kindness has
ever been wasted on you, whether the memory of all your benefits lives
ever in you.  You will find that those you received as a boy slipped
from your memory before you were a youth, those that were bestowed in
your early manhood have not survived into old age.  Some we have lost,
some we have thrown away, some have gradually slipped from our sight,
from some we have turned away our eyes.  In order to excuse your
weakness, I might say that the memory is a very frail vessel, and is
not strong enough to hold a mass of things; it must necessarily lose
to the extent that it receives, and the newest impressions crowd out
the oldest.  Thus it is that your nurse has least influence over you
because the passing years have left her benefit in the long ago; thus
it is that you have no longer any veneration for your teacher; so it
happens that now, when you are occupied with your election to the
consulship or your candidature for the priesthood, you have lost all
memory of the voter who gave you the quaestorship.  Perhaps, if you
search carefully, you will find in your own bosom the vice of which
you complain. {Common_Humanity+} It is unfair for you to be angry with
a universal failing, foolish to be angry with your own - you must
pardon if you would win pardon. {judge_not+} You will make a man
better by bearing with him, certainly worse by reproaching him.  There
is no reason why you should harden him in effrontery; let him keep
what little shame he has.  Too loud reproaches often hurry wavering
probity to its fall.  No man shrinks from being what he appears to be;
he loses his sense of shame by being found out.  "I have wasted my
benefit," you say.  Can we ever say that we have wasted the things
that we have hallowed?  But a benefit that has been well bestowed,
even if we have ill return for it, is one of the hallowed things.  He
is not the kind of man we hoped he was; unlike him, let us be the kind
we have always been.  Your loss did not occur at the time of his
ingratitude - it then simply became evident.  A man is not revealed as
ungrateful without bringing shame on us, since, in fact, to complain
of the loss of a benefit is proof that it was not well bestowed. As
far as we can, we ought to plead his case before our own bar: "Perhaps
he was not able, perhaps he was unaware, perhaps he will still do so."
Some accounts have been made good by a long-suffering and wise
creditor who has kept them alive and nursed them by waiting.  We ought
to do the same; let us strengthen a weak sense of good faith.  "I have
wasted my benefit," you say.  You fool, you do not understand when
your loss took place!  You wasted it, but at the time you gave it;
{no_strings+} the fact has only now been revealed.  Even in the case
of those which seem to have been wasted, forbearance is often most
valuable; the cankers of the mind, as of the body, must be handled
tenderly.  The string that might have been untied by patience is often
snapped by a violent pull.  What need is there of abuse? Of
complaints?  Of reproaches?  Why do you free him from obligation?  Why
do you let him go?  Even if he is ungrateful, he owes you nothing
after this.  What sense is there in exasperating one upon whom you
have bestowed great favours, with the result that from being a
doubtful friend he will become an undoubted enemy, and will seek to
protect himself by defaming you, nor will gossip fail to say: "I do
not know why he could not put up with one to whom he owed so much;
there is something at the bottom of it"?  Any man, even if he does not
stain, asperses the reputation of a superior by complaining of him;
and no one is content to trump up light accusations, since he seeks to
win belief by the very magnitude of his lie.

How much better the course that will preserve a semblance of
friendship with him, and, if he returns to his senses, even
friendship!  Persistent goodness wins over bad men, and no one of them
is so hard-hearted and hostile to kindly treatment as not to love a
good man even while they wrong him, when even the fact that they can
fail to pay with impunity is made an additional source of indebtedness
to him. {forgive+} And so let your thoughts follow this trend: "He has
not repaid me with gratitude; what shall I do?  Do as the gods, those
glorious authors of all things, do; they begin to give benefits to him
who knows them not, and persist in giving them to those who are
ungrateful.  Some reproach them with indifference to us, others with
injustice; some/a place them outside of their world, and abandon them
to sloth and languor, leaving them without light, without any task;
others call the sun, to whom we owe the division of our hours of work
and rest, and our escape from being plunged into darkness and the
chaos of eternal night, who by his course regulates the seasons,
nourishes our bodies, calls forth the crops, and ripens the fruits,
merely a mass of stone or a fortuitous collection of fiery particles -
anything rather than a god.  Yet, none the less, like the best of
parents, who only smile at the spiteful words of their children, the
gods do not cease to heap their benefits upon those who are doubtful
about the source of benefits, but distribute their blessings, among
the nations and peoples with unbroken uniformity.  Possessing only the
power of doing good, they sprinkle the lands with timely rains, they
stir the seas with their blasts, they mark off the seasons by the
course of the stars, they modify the extremes of summer and winter by
interposing periods of milder temperature, and, ever gentle and
kindly, bear with the errors of our feeble spirits. {Nature+} Let us
imitate them; let us give, even if many of our gifts have been given
in vain; none the less, let us give to still others, nay, even to
those at whose hands we have suffered loss.  The destruction of one
house deters no one from erecting another, and, when fire has swept
away our household gods, we lay new foundations while the ground is
still hot, and over and over we entrust new cities to the same spot
that has swallowed up others; so persistently does the mind foster
fair hopes+.  Men would cease their operations on land and sea unless
they had been willing to renew the attempts that had failed. xxx"If a
man is ungrateful, he has done, not me, but himself, an injury; I had
the fruit of my benefit when I gave it. {give_freely+} And the
experience will make me, not slower to give, but more careful in
giving; what I have lost in the case of one man, I shall recover from
others.  But even to him I shall give a second benefit, and, even as a
good farmer overcomes the sterility of his ground by care and
cultivation, I shall be victor; my benefit is lost to me, he is lost
to mankind.  It is no proof of a fine spirit to give a benefit and
lose it; the proof of a fine spirit is to lose and still to give!"
