I thought that I had finished my task in the preceding books, having
discussed there how a benefit ought to be given, and how it ought to
be received; for these two points are the boundary marks of this
particular service.  In any further inquiry, I shall be, not serving,
but indulging, my subject, the only demand of which is that I follow
whither it leads, not whither it allures; for now and then a
suggestion will be born that challenges the mind by a certain charm,
yet remains, if not a useless, an unnecessary addition.  Since,
however, such is your wish, having finished with the matters that
bound the subject, let us continue to examine further those that, if I
must tell the truth, are associated with it, yet are not actually
connected; whoever examines these carefully will neither be repaid for
his pains nor yet wholly waste his pains.

To you, however, Aebutius Liberalis, who are naturally the best of men
and prone to benefits, no laudation of them seems to be adequate.
Never have I seen anyone who was so generous in his estimate of even
the most trivial services; your goodness has reached such a degree
that, when any man is given a benefit, you count it as given to
yourself; in order that no one may regret the bestowal of a benefit,
you are ready to pay the debts of the ungrateful.  So far removed are
you yourself from all boasting, so eager at once to free those whom
you place under obligation from the burden of it, that, in making a
gift to anyone, you wish to appear, not to be bestowing, but to be
returning, one; and so all that is given in this manner will be
returned to you in richer measure.  For benefits usually pursue the
man who asks no return, and just as glory is more apt to pursue those
who flee from it, so those who are willing to allow men to be
ungrateful reap a more grateful return for the benefits they have
given them.  Truly, so far as you are concerned, there is nothing to
prevent those who have received benefits from boldly repeating their
request, nor will you refuse to confer others, and to add more and
greater benefits to those that have been covert and concealed -
excellent man that you are and a truly great soul, your aim is to bear
with an ungrateful man so long that he will in the end become
grateful.  Nor will your method deceive you; vices will yield to
virtue if you do not hasten too quickly to hate them.  In any case the
precept that it is disgraceful to be outdone in bestowing benefits+
gives you unique pleasure as being a glorious utterance.  Whether this
is true or not is often rightly questioned, and the case is quite
different from what you imagine.  For it is never disgraceful to be
worsted in a struggle for something honourable, provided that you do
not throw down your arms, and that, even when conquered, you still
wish to conquer.  Not all bring the same strength to the
accomplishment of a good purpose, nor the same resources, nor the same
favour of Fortune, which modifies at all events the issues of even the
best plans; praise should be awarded to the very desire that strives
in the right direction even though another by his swifter pace
outstrips it.  It is not as in the contests provided as a public
spectacle, where the palm declares which is the better contestant,
although even in these chance often gives the preference to the poorer
man.  When the object of the struggle is a service which both on their
part are eager to make as great as possible, if one of the two has had
greater power, and has had at hand ample resources to accomplish his
purpose, if Fortune permits him to attain all that he has attempted,
while the other matches him only in desire - even if the latter has
returned smaller gifts than he received, or, has not returned all, but
wishes to make return, and strives with his whole soul to do so, he is
no more conquered than is the soldier who dies in arms, whom the enemy
could more easily kill than turn from his purpose. You are counting it
a disgrace to be conquered, but that cannot possibly happen to a good
man.  For he will never surrender, he will never give up; to the last
day of his life he will stand prepared, and in that posture will die,
proud of having received great gifts and of having desired to repay
them.

The Lacedaemonians forbid their young men to contend in the
pancratium or with the caestus, where the weaker contestant is shown
by his own admission that he has been conquered.  A runner wins by
being the first to reach the chalk-line; he surpasses his opponent,
not in pluck but in speed.  A wrestler who has been thrown three
times, though he does not surrender the palm, loses it.  Since the
Lacedaemonians thought it highly important to have their citizens
invincible, they kept them out of those contests in which the victor
is determined, not by a judge, or purely by the outcome itself, but by
the cry of the vanquished proclaiming surrender., This quality of
never being conquered, which the Lacedaemonians safeguard for their
citizens, is bestowed on all men by virtue and virtuous desire, since
the spirit is unconquered even in the midst of defeat.  For this
reason no one speaks of the three hundred Fabii as conquered, but
slaughtered; and Regulus was captured by the Carthaginians, not
conquered, nor is any other man who, though overwhelmed by the
strength and weight of angry Fortune, does not yield in spirit.  The
same is true of benefits. A man may have received more than he gave,
greater ones, more frequent ones, yet, for all that, he has not been
conquered.  If you reckon those that you have given over against those
that you have received, it is true, perhaps, that benefits are
surpassed by benefits; but, if you match the giver against the
recipient, taking into consideration, as you must, their intentions in
themselves, the palm will belong to neither.  For, even when one
combatant has been pierced by many wounds, while the other has been
but slightly wounded, it is customary to say that they left the arena
evenly matched, although it is evident that one of them is the weaker
man. xxx No one, therefore, can be outdone in benefits if he knows how
to owe a debt, if he desires to make return - if he matches his
benefactor in spirit, even though he cannot match him in deeds.  So
long as he continues in this state of mind, so long as he holds the
desire to give proof of a grateful heart, what difference does it make
on which side the greater number of gifts is reckoned?  You are able
to give much, and I am able only to receive; on your side stands good
fortune, on my side good desire; yet I am as much your peer as naked
or lightly armed soldiers are the peers of the many who are fully
armed.  No one, therefore, is outdone in benefits because each man's
gratitude is to be measured by his desire.  For, if it is disgraceful
to be outdone in benefits it is not right to accept a benefit from
most powerful men whose kindness you are unable to return - I mean
princes and kings, who have been placed by Fortune in a position that
enables them to bestow many gifts, and are likely to receive very few
and very inadequate returns for what they have given.  I have spoken
of kings and princes, to whom, nevertheless, it is possible for us to
render assistance, and whose preeminent power rests upon the consent
and service of their inferiors. But there are some men who, withdrawn
beyond.the reach of every lust, are scarcely touched at all by any
human desires; upon whom Fortune herself has nothing that she can
bestow.  In benefits I must of necessity be outdone by Socrates, of
necessity by Diogenes, who marchea naked through the midst of the
treasures of the Macedonians, treading under foot the wealth of kings.
O! in very truth, how rightly did he seem then, both to himself and to
all others who had not been rendered blind to the perception of truth,
to tower above the man beneath whose feet lay the whole world!  Far
more powerful, far richer was he than Alexander, who then was master
of the whole world; for what Diogenes refused to receive was even more
than Alexander was able to give. {poor_is_rich+}

It is not disgraceful to be outdone by such as these for it is not
proved that I am the less brave if you pit me against an enemy that is
invulnerable, nor that fire is the less able to burn if it falls upon
a substance that flames cannot harm, nor that iron has lost its power
of cutting if it attempts to cleave stone that is solid, impervious to
a blow, and by its very nature invincible to hard instruments.  In
regard to the grateful man I would answer you in the same way.  He is
not disgracefully outdone in benefits if he has become indebted to
those whose exalted station or exceeding merit blocks the approach to
any benefits that might return to them.  Our parents almost always
outdo us.  For, so long as we count them severe, so long as we fail to
understand the benefits they give us, we have them with us.  When at
last with age we have acquired some wisdom, and it begins to be
evident that we ought to love them for the very things that kept us
from loving them - their admonitions, their strictness, and their
careful watch over our heedless youth - they are snatched from us. Few
reach the age when they can reap some true reward from their children;
the rest are aware of their sons by their burden.  Yet there is no
disgrace in being outdone in benefits by a parent; how should there
be, seeing that there is no disgrace in being outdone by anyone?  For
there are some men to whom we are both equal and unequal - equal in
intention, which is all that they require, unequal in fortune, and, if
it is this that prevents anyone from repaying a favour, he has no need
to blush on the ground that he has been outdone.  It is no disgrace to
fail to attain provided you keep striving.  Very often it is necessary
to ask for new benefits before we have returned older ones, and yet we
do not fail to ask for them or feel any disgrace because we shall be
indebted for them with no prospect of returning them, for, if we are
prevented from showing ourselves most grateful, it will be the fault,
not of ourselves, but of something from without that intervenes and
deters us.  Yet in intention we shall not be outdone, nor shall we be
disgraced if we are overpowered by things that are beyond our
control. Alexander, king of the Macedonians, used to boast that no one
had outdone him in benefits.  But there is no reason why, in the
excess of his pride, he should look up to the Macedonians and the
Greeks and the Carians and the Persians and the other nations who were
enrolled in his army, nor suppose that it was their benefit that had
bestowed upon him a kingdom that extended from a corner of Thrace to
the shore of the unknown sea!  Socrates could have had the same reason
to boast, and Diogenes the same reason, by whom, in any case, he was
outdone.  Why was he not outdone on that day when, puffed up as he was
beyond the limits of human pride, he saw someone to whom he could give
nothing, from whom he could take nothing away?

King Archelaus once invited Socrates to come to him.  But Socrates is
said to have replied that he was not willing to go to him in order
that he might receive benefits from him, since he would be unable to
make adequate return for them.  Yet, in the first place, he was at
liberty to refuse to accept them; in the second place, he would have
anticipated him in bestowing a benefit, for he would have come because
he was invited, and would, at any rate, have given something for which
Archelaus could have made no return to Socrates.  Furthermore, if
Archelaus was going to give to him gold and silver, and was going to
receive in return only a scorn for gold and silver, could not Socrates
have repaid Archelaus with his thanks?  And what could he have
received that would have had the value of what he gave if he had
revealed to Archelaus a man who was skilled in the knowledge of life
and of death, and comprehended the ends of both? If he had admitted
into the secrets of Nature one who even in broad daylight had lost his
way - a king, so ignorant of her ways that one day, when there was an
eclipse of the sun, he shut up his palace, and, as is customary in
times of grief and disaster, sheared his son's hair?  How great a
benefit it would have been if Socrates had dragged the frightened king
from his hiding-place, and bidden him be of good cheer, saying: "This
does not mean the disappearance of the sun, but that two heavenly
bodies are in conjunction by reason of the fact that the moon, which
travels by a lower path has placed her disk exactly beneath the sun
itself, and has hidden it by interposing her own body.  Sometimes, if
she just grazes the sun in passing, she veils only a small portion of
it; sometimes, if she thrusts the greater part of her body in front of
it, she conceals a larger portion; sometimes, if, being between the
earth and the sun, she reaches a point where the three bodies are in a
straight line, she shuts off completely the sight of the sun.  But
soon their own speed will draw these heavenly bodies apart, one to
this position, the other to that; soon the earth will recover the
light of day.  And this order Will continue throughout the ages. and
has its appointed days, that are known beforehand, on which the sun is
prevented from sending forth all his rays because of the intervention
of the moon.  Wait just a little while; soon he will emerge, soon he
will leave behind this seeming cloud, soon he will be rid of all
obstructions, and will freely send forth his light." Could not
Socrates have made adequate return to Archelaus for his favour if he
had forbidden him to be king?  Assuredly the benefit he received
from Socrates would have been too small if it had been possible for
him to bestow any benefit on Socrates!  Why, then, did Socrates says
this?  Being a clever person, who was given to talking in parables, a
mocker of all, especially of the great, he preferred to couch his
refusal in irony rather than in stubbornness or pride; he said that he
was not willing to receive benefits from one to whom he could not make
adequate return.  Perhaps he feared that he might be forced to accept
gifts that he did not wish, that he might be forced to accept
something unworthy of Socrates.  Someone will say: "He could have
refused it if he wished." But he would have made an enemy of the king,
who was arrogant, and wished all his favours to be highly valued.
Whether you are unwilling to give something to a king, or to accept
something from a king is of no consequence; both alike are in his eyes
a rebuff, and to be treated with scorn is more bitter to a proud
spirit than not to be feared.  Would you like to know what Socrates
really meant? He meant that the man whose freedom of speech even a
free state could not endure declined to enter into voluntary
servitude!

But I think that we have sufficiently discussed this topic of whether
it is disgraceful to be outdone in benefits.  Whoever raises the
question must know that men are not in the habit of bestowing benefits
upon themselves; for it would have been evident that there is no
disgrace in a man's being outdone by himself.  Yet among certain
Stoics it is even debated whether it is possible for a man to bestow a
benefit on himself, whether it is his duty to return gratitude to
himself.  The reason why it seemed necessary to raise the question was
our habitual use of such expressions as: "I am thankful to myself," "I
can blame no one but myself," "I am angry with myself," "I shall exact
punishment from myself," "I hate myself" and, many others of the same
sort in which one speaks of oneself as if another person.  "If," they
say, "I am able to injure myself, why should I not be able, also to
bestow a benefit on myself?  Moreover, why should not things that
would be called benefits if I had bestowed them on another still be
benefits if I have bestowed them on myself?  Why should not something
that would have placed me in debt if I had received it from another
still place me in debt if I have given it to myself?  Why should I be
ungrateful to myself, which is just as disgraceful as to be niggardly
to oneself and harsh and cruel to oneself and neglectful of oneself?
The reputation of a pimp is equally bad whether he prostitutes himself
or another.  The flatterer, the man who subscribes to the words of
another, and is ready to applaud falsehoods, is of course open to
censure; and not less so is the man who is pleased with himself, who,
so to speak, looks up to himself, and is his own flatterer.  The vices
are hateful, not only when they are outwardly expressed, but when they
are turned in upon themselves.  Whom will you more admire than the man
who governs himself, who has himself under control? It is easier to
rule savage nations, impatient as they are of the authority of others,
than to restrain one's own spirit and submit to selfcontrol. Plato,
say they, was grateful to Socrates be- cause he learned from him; why
should not Socrates be grateful to himself because he taught himself?
Marcus Cato says: 'Borrow from yourself whatever you lack.' If I am
able to lend to myself, why should I not be able to give to myself?
The instances in which habit leads us to divide ourselves into two
persons are countless; we are prone to say: 'Let me converse with
myself,' and, 'I will give my ear a twitch.' If there is any truth
in these expressions, just as a man ought to be angry with himself, so
he ought to render thanks to himself; as he ought to reprove himself,
so also he ought to praise himself; as he can cause himself loss, so
also he can bring himself gain.  Injury and benefit are the converse
of each other; if we say of anyone: 'He has done himself an injury,'
we may also say: 'He has bestowed upon himself a benefit.'" Nature's
rule is that a man should first become a debtor, and then should
return gratitude; there cannot be a debtor without a creditor any more
than there can be a husband without a wife, - or a father without a
son; someone must give in order that someone may receive.  To transfer
something from the left hand to the right hand is neither to give nor
to receive.  Just as no one carries himself although he moves and
transports his body, as no one, although he has spoken in his own
defence, is said to have appeared as his own advocate, or erects a
statue to himself as his own patron, as no sick man, when he has
regained health by treating himself, demands from himself a fee, so in
transactions of every sort - even though he may have done something
that has been to his advantage, yet he will be under no obligation to
return gratitude to himself because he will not find any person to
whom he can return it.  Though I grant that a man may bestow a benefit
on himself, yet at the same time that he gives it, he also receives a
return; though I grant that a man may receive a benefit from himself,
yet at the same time that he receives it, he returns it.  "You
borrow," as they say, "from your own pocket," and, just as if it were
a game, the item immediately shifts to the other side; for the giver
and the receiver are not to be differentiated, but are one and the
same person.  The word "owe" has no place unless two persons are
involved; how, then, will it apply to one person, who, in the act of
incurring a debt, frees himself from it?  In a disk or a sphere there
is no bottom, no top, no end, no beginning, because as the object is
moved, the relations change, and the part that was behind now
precedes, and the part that was going down now comes up, yet all, in
whatever direction they may move, come back to the same
position. Imagine that the same principle applies in the case of a
man; though you may transform him into many different characters, he
remains a simple human being.  He strikes himself - there is no one
whom he may charge with doing him an injury.  He binds himself and
locks himself up - he is not held for damages.  He bestows a benefit
on himself - he has forthwith made return to the giver.

In the realm of Nature, it is said, there is never any loss, for
whatever is taken out of it, returns to it, and nothing is able to
perish, because there is no place into which it can escape, but
everything returns to whence it came.  "What is the bearing," you ask,
"of this illustration on the question that is before us?" I will tell
you.  Suppose that you are un- grateful - the benefit is not lost, for
the one who bestowed it still has it, Suppose that you are unwilling
to receive a return - it is already in your possession before it is
returned.  You are not able to lose anything, because what is
withdrawn from you is none the less acquired by you.  The operation
proceeds in a circle within yourself - in receiving you give, in
giving you receive.

"One ought," you say, "to bestow benefit on oneself; therefore one
ought also to return gratitude to oneself." But the first proposition,
on which the conclusion depends, is false; for no one bestows benefit
on himself, but a man simply obeys a natural instinct that disposes
him to show affection for himself, and it is this that causes him to
take the utmost pains to avoid what is hurtful, and to seek what is
beneficial.  Consequently, the man who gives to himself is not
generous, nor is he who pardons himself merciful, nor he who is
touched by his own misfortunes pitiful.  For generosity, mercy, and
pity contribute to others; natural instinct contributes to oneself.  A
benefit is a voluntary act, but self-interest is a law of nature.  The
more benefits a man bestows, the more beneficent he becomes; but who
was ever praised for having been of service to himself? for having
rescued himself from brigands?  No one any more bestows a benefit upon
himself than he does hospitality; no one any more gives to himself
than he lends to himself.

If every man does bestow benefits on himself, if he is always
bestowing them, and bestows them without cessation, it will be
impossible for him to reckon the number of his benefits.  When, then,
will he be able to return gratitude, since, by the act of returning
gratitude, he will be giving a benefit?  For how will you be able to
tell whether he is giving, or returning, a benefit to himself, since
the transactions take place within one and the same man? I have freed
myself from peril - I have, then, bestowed a benefit upon myself.  I
free myself from peril a second time - am I, then, giving, or
returning, a benefit to myself?

Again, although I should grant the first proposition, that we do
bestow benefit upon ourselves, I shall not grant the conclusion that
is drawn from it; for even if we give, we owe nothing.  Why? because
we immediately receive a return.  I ought, properly, to receive a
benefit, then be indebted, then repay; but there is no opportunity
here to be indebted, for we receive a return without any delay.  No
one really gives except to another, no one owes except to another, no
one return's except to another. An act that so often requires two
persons cannot be performed within the limits of one.

A benefit is the contribution of something useful but "contribution"
implies the existence of others.  If a man says that he has sold
something to himself, will he not be thought mad?  For selling means
alienation, the transferring of one's property and one's right in it
to another.  Yet, just as is the case in selling, giving implies the
relinquishment of something, the surrendering of something that you
have held to the possession of another.  And if this is so, no one has
ever bestowed a benefit upon himself because no one can "give" to
himself; otherwise two opposites are combined in one act, so that
giving and receiving are the same thing.  Yet there is a great
difference between giving and receiving; why should there not be,
since these words are applied to exactly opposite actions?  Yet, if
anyone can give a benefit to himself, there is no difference between
giving and receiving.  I said a little while ago that certain words
imply the existence of other persons, and are of such fashion that
their whole meaning is directed away from ourselves.  I am a brother,
but of another, for no one can be his own brother; I am an equal, but
of someone else, for can any man be the equal of himself?  Unless
there are two objects, comparison is unintelligible; unless there are
two objects, there can be no coupling; so also, unless there are two
persons, there can be no giving, and, unless there are two persons,
there can be no benefaction. This is clear from the very expression,
"to do good to," by which the act is defined; but no one any more does
good to himself than he befriends himself, or belongs to his own
party.  I might pursue this theme further, and multiply examples.  Of
course, since benefaction must be included among those acts that
require a second person.  Certain actions, though honourable,
admirable, and highly virtuous, find a field only in the person of
another. Fidelity is praised, and honoured as one of the greatest
blessings of the human race, yet is it ever said that anyone for that
reason has kept his promise to himself?

I come now to the last part of the subject. He who returns gratitude
ought to expend something, just as he who pays a debt expends money;
but he who returns gratitude to himself expends nothing, just as
surely as he who has received a benefit from himself gains nothing. A
benefit and the repayment of gratitude must pass from one to the
other; no interchange is possible if only one person is involved.  He
who returns gratitude does good in his turn to the one from whom he
obtained something.  But he who returns gratitude to himself - to whom
does he do good?  Only to himself.  And who does not think of the
repayment of gratitude as one act, and the bestowal of a benefit as
another? He who returns gratitude to himself does good to himself.
And what ingrate was ever unwilling to do this?  Nay, rather, who was
ever an ingrate except that he might do this?  "If," you say, "we
ought to render thanks to ourselves, we ought also to return
gratitude; yet we say: 'I am thankful to myself that I refused to
marry that woman,' and 'that I did not conclude a partnership with
that man.' "But when we say this, we are lauding ourselves, and, in
order to show approval of our act, we misapply the language of those
who render thanks.  A benefit is something which, when given, May, or
may not, be returned.  Now he who gives a benefit to himself cannot
help having what he has given returned; therefore this is not a
benefit.  A benefit is received at one time, is returned at another.
A benefit, too, possesses this commendable, this most praiseworthy,
quality, that a man forgets for the time being his own interest in
order that he may give help to another, that he is ready to deprive
himself of what he gives to another.  But he who gives a benefit to
himself does not do this.  The giving of a benefit is a social act, it
wins the goodwill of someone, it lays someone under obligation; giving
to oneself is not a social act, it wins no one's goodwill, it lays no
one under obligation, it raises no man's hopes, or leads him to say:
"I must cultivate this man; he has given a benefit to So-and-so, he
will give one to me also." A benefit is something that a man gives,
not for his own sake, but for the sake of the one to whom he is
giving.  But he who gives a benefit to himself gives for his own sake;
this, then, is not a benefit.

I seem to you now to have been false to the claim that I made at the
beginning.  For you say that I am far from doing anything worth while
nay, that, in honest truth, I am wasting all my trouble.  But wait,
and you will soon say this with more truth after I have led you into
such obscurities that, even when you have found your way out, you will
have accomplished nothing more than escape from difficulties into
which you need never have plunged.  For what is the good of
laboriously untying knots which you yourself have made in order that
you might untie them?  But, just as it provides amusement and sport
when certain objects are knotted up in such a way that an unskilled
person has difficulty in unloosing them, while they yield without any
trouble to the one who tied the knots because he knows the loops and
the snarls, and nevertheless the problem affords some pleasure, for it
tests sharpness of wits and provokes mental effort, so these matters,
which seem cunning and tricky, banish indifference and sloth from our
minds, which, at one time, should find a level field in which to
wander, and, at another, should encounter a dark and uneven stretch,
through which we must merely creep, and place every footstep with
care.  Some argue that no man is ungrateful, and support the statement
as follows: "a benefit is that which does good; but, according to you
Stoics, no one is able to do good to a bad man; therefore a bad man
does not receive a benefit, <therefore he> is <not> ungrateful.
xxx"Furthermore, you say, a benefit is an honourable and commendable
act; but no honourable and commendable act has place in a bad man,
therefore neither has a benefit; and, if he cannot receive one,
neither ought he to return one, and, therefore, he does not become
ungrateful.

"Furthermore, according to you, a good man always acts rightly; but,
if he always acts rightly, he cannot be ungrateful. No one is able to
give a benefit to a bad man.  A good man returns a benefit, a bad man
does not receive one; and, if this is so, neither is any good man, nor
any bad man, ungrateful.  So in the whole realm of Nature, there is no
such thing as an ungrateful man, and the term is an empty one."

According to us Stoics there is only one sort of good, the
honourable. {honestum+} A bad man cannot possibly attain this; for he
will cease to be bad if virtue has entered into him; but, so long as
he is bad, no one is able to give him a benefit, because evils and
goods are opposites, and cannot unite.  Therefore, no one can do good
to him, for whatever good reaches him is vitiated by his wrong use of
it.  Just as the stomach, when it is impaired by discase, gathers
bile, and, changing all the food that it receives, turns every sort of
sustenance into a source of pain, so, in the case of the perverse
mind, whatever you entrust to it becomes to it a burden and a source
of disaster and wretchedness.  And so those who are most prosperous
and wealthy are beset with most trouble, and the more property they
have to cause them unrest, the less they find themselves.  Nothing,
therefore, which would be to their good can possibly come to bad men -
nay, nothing which would not do them harm.  For whatever good falls to
their lot they change into their own evil nature, and seemingly
attractive gifts that would be beneficial if they were given to a
better man become baneful to them.  Nor, therefore, are they able to
give a benefit, since no one is able to give what he does not have;
such a man lacks the desire to benefit,

But, though this is so, still even a bad man is able to receive
certain things that resemble benefits, and he will be ungrateful if he
does not return them.  There are goods of the mind, goods of the body,
and goods of fortune.  The fool and the bad man are debarred from the
goods of the mind; but he is admitted to the others - these he can
receive and ought to return, and, if he does not return them, he is
ungrateful.  And ours is not the only school that holds this doctrine.
The Peripatetics also, who widely extend the bounds of human
happiness, say that trifling benefits come even to the bad, and that
he who does not return such is ungrateful.  We, therefore, do not
agree that things that will not make the mind better are benefits;
nevertheless we do not deny that those things are advantageous and
desirable.  These things a bad man is able both to give to a good man
and to receive from him, such as money and clothing and public office
and life; and, if he does not return them, he will fall into the class
of the ungrateful. xxx "But," you retort, "how can you call a man
ungrateful if he fails to return something which you will not admit to
be a benefit?" Certain things, on account of their similarity, are
designated by the same term even at the expense of some inaccuracy.
Thus we speak of a silver and a golden "pyxis"; thus, too, we call a
man "illiterate," though he may be not utterly untutored but only not
acquainted with the higher branches of learning; thus, too, one who
has seen a man wretchedly clad and in rags says that the man he saw
was "naked." The things that we mean are not really benefits, but have
the appearance of benefits.  "Then," you retort, "just as these things
are quasi-benefits, so also the man is, not an ingrate, but a
quasi-ingrate." No, not so, because both the giver and the recipient
of these things call them benefits.  So, he who fails to return the
semblance of a true benefit is just as much an ingrate as he is a
poisoner who, when he thought that he was concocting poison, concocted
a sleeping-draught!

The words of Cleanthes are even stronger. "Granted," he says, "that
what the man received was not a benefit, yet he himself is an ingrate
because, even if he had received a benefit, he would not have returned
it." So, a man becomes a brigand even before he stains his hands with
blood, because he has armed himself to kill, and possesses the desire
to murder and rob; he practises and manifests wickedness in action,
but it does not begin there.  Men are punished for sacrilege, but no
man's hands can actually reach the gods.  "How," it is asked, "can
anyone be ungrateful to a bad man, since a bad man is unable to give a
benefit?" For the reason, of course, that, while the gift that was
received was not a benefit, it was called one.  If anyone receives
from a bad man any of these things that the ignorant possess, of
which even the bad have a store, it will be his duty to be grateful
with a like offering, and, no matter what may be the nature of the
gifts, to return them as true goods since he received them as true
goods.  A man is said to be in debt whether he owes pieces of gold
or pieces of leather stamped with the seal of the state, such as the
Lacedaemonians used, which serve the purpose of coined money.
Discharge your indebtedness in that kind by which you incurred it.
What benefits are, whether so great and noble a term should be
degraded by being applied to such mean and vulgar matter, does not
concern you; your search for truth is to the detriment of others.  Do
you adjust your minds to the semblance of truth, and, while you are
learning true virtue, honour whatever vaunts the name of virtue.

"As, according to you," I someone retorts, "no man is ungrateful, so,
on the other hand, all men are ungrateful." Yes, for, as we say, all
fools are bad; moreover, he who has one vice has them all; but all men
are foolish and bad; all men, therefore, are ungrateful. What, then?
Are they not?  Is it not an indictment that is everywhere brought
against the human race?  Is it not a universal complaint that benefits
are thrown away, that there are only a very few who do not requite
those who have treated them kindly with the greatest unkindness?  Nor
need you suppose that I am merely voicing the grumbling of the Stoics,
who count every act as most evil and wrong that falls short of the
standard of righteousness. Hear the voice of one who cries out
condemnation upon all nations and peoples, a voice that issues, not
from the home of philosophy, but from the midst of the crowd!

> No guest from host is safe, nor daughter's sire

> From daughter's spouse; e'en brothers' love is rare.

> The husband doth his wife, she him, ensnare.

This goes even further - here crime takes the place of benefits, and
the blood of those for whom blood ought to be shed is not spared; we
requite benefits with the sword and poison.  To lay hands upon the
fatherland itself and crush it with its own fasces is to gain rank and
power.  Whoever does not stand above the commonweal thinks that he
stands in a position that is low and degraded.  The armies that she
has given are turned against herself, and the general now harangues
his men with: "Fight against your wives, fight against your children!
Assail with arms your altars, hearths, and household gods!" Yes, you
who had no right to enter the city without the permission of the
senate even in order to triumph, who, when bringing back a victorious
army, should have been given an audience outside the walls, now, after
slaughtering your own countrymen, and stained with the blood of
kinsmen, enter into the city with flying flags.  Amidst the ensigns of
soldiers let Liberty be dumb, and, now that all war has been banished
afar, all terror suppressed, let that people who conquered and
pacified the nations of the earth be beleaguered within its own walls,
and shudder at the sight of its own eagles.

Ungrateful is Coriolanus, who became dutiful too late, and after
penitence for crime; he laid down his arms, but he laid them down in
the midst of unholy war.

Ungrateful is Catiline; he is not satisfied with seizing his
fatherland -he must overturn it, he must let loose against it the
cohorts of the Allobroges, he must summon an enemy from beyond the
Alps to satiate its old and inborn hatred, and pay with the lives of
Roman leaders the sacrifices long owed to Gallic tombs. Ungrateful
is Gaius Marius {Coriolanus?+}, who, though raised from the rank of a
common soldier to repeated consulships, will feel that the change in
his fortune has been too slight, and that he would sink to his former
position did he not match the slaughter of the Cimbrians with a
sacrifice of Roman lives, did he not; not merely give, but himself
become, the signal for the destruction and butchery of his countrymen.

Ungrateful is Lucius Sulla, who healed his fatherland by remedies that
were harsher than her ills, who, having marched through human blood
all the way from the citadel of Praeneste to the Colline Gate, staged
other battles, other murders inside the city; two legions that had
been crowded into a corner he butchered; O! the cruelty of it, after
he had won the victory, O! the wickedness of it, after he had promised
them quarter; and he devised proscription, great gods! in order that
anyone who had killed a Roman citizen might claim impunity, money, all
but a civic crown!

Ungrateful is Gnaeus Pompeius, who in return for three consulships, in
return for three triumphs, in return for the many public offices into
most of which he had thrust himself before the legal age, showed such
gratitude to the commonwealth that he induced others also to lay
hands upon her - as if he could render his own power less odious by
giving several others the right to do what no man ought to have had
the right to do!  While he coveted extraordinary commands, while he
distributed the provinces to suit his own choice, while he divided the
commonwealth in such a way, that though a third person had a share,
two-thirds of it remained in his own family,a he reduced the Roman
people to such a plight that only by the acceptance of slavery were
they able to survive.  The foe and conqueror of Pompeius was himself
ungrateful. From Gaul and Germany he whirled war to Rome, and that
friend of the people, that democrat, pitched his camp in the Circus
Flaminius, even nearer to the city than Porsina's had been.  It is
true that he used the cruel privileges of victory with moderation; the
promise that he was fond of making he kept - he killed no man who was
not in arms.  But what of it?  The others used their arms more
cruelly, yet, once glutted, flung them aside; he quickly sheathed his
sword, but never laid it down.

Ungrateful was Antony to his dictator, who he declared was rightly
slain, and whose murderers he allowed to depart to their commands in
the provinces.  His country, torn as it had been by proscriptions,
invasions, and wars, after all her ills, he wished to make subject to
kings, who were not even Roman, in order that a city that had restored
sovereign rights, autonomy, and immunity to the Achaeans, the
Rhodians, and many famous cities, might herself pay tribute to
eunuchs!

The day will fail me to enumerate those whose ingratitude resulted in
the ruin of their country.  Equally endless will be the task if I
attempt a survey of how ungrateful the commonwealth herself has been
to its best and most devoted servants, and how it has sinned not less
often than it has been sinned against.  Camillus it sent into exile,
Scipio went with its con- -------- a An allusion to the Egyptian court
and Antony+'s surrender to the charms of Cleopatra.  sent; it exiled
Cicero, even after the conspiracy of Catiline, destroyed his home,
plundered his property, did everything that a victorious Catiline
would have done; Rutilius found his blamelessness rewarded with a
hiding-place in Asia; to Cato the Roman people refused the
praetorship, and persisted in refusing the consulship.

We are universally ungrateful.  Let each one question himself -
everyone will find someone to complain of for being ungrateful.  But
it is impossible that all men should complain, unless all men gave
cause for complaint - all men, therefore, are ungrateful.  Are they
ungrateful only?  They are also covetous and spiteful and cowardly -
especially those who appear to be bold.  Besides, all are
self-seeking, all are ungodly.  But you have no need to be angry with
them; pardon them - they are all mad. {Lear+} To refer you to
uncertain instances is not my desire, so I say: "See how ungrateful is
youth!  What young man does not long for his father's last day though
his hands are clean?  Does not look forward to it though he curbs his
desire?  Does not ponder it though he is dutiful?  How few there are
who dread so much the death of their best of wives that they do not
even calculate the probabilities?  What litigant, I ask you, after he
has been defended, retains the memory of so great a benefit beyond the
hour it happened?"

And all agree in asking who dies without complaint! Who on his last
day ventures to say:

> I've lived; my destined course I now have run.

Who does not shrink
from departure?  Who does not mourn it?  Yet not to be satisfied with
the time one has had is to be ungrateful.  Your days will always seem
few if you stop to count them.  Reflect that your greatest blessing
does not lie in mere length of time; make the best of it however short
it may be.  Though the day of your death should be postponed, your
happiness is in no whit enhanced, since life becomes, not more
blissful, but merely longer, by the delay.  How much better it is to
be grateful for the pleasures that have been enjoyed, not to reckon up
the years of others, but to set a generous value on one's own, and to
score them down as gain!  "God deemed me worthy of this, this is
enough; he might have given more, but even this is a benefit." Let us
be grateful to the gods, grateful to mankind, grateful to those who
have bestowed anvthing, upon ourselves, grateful also to those who
have bestowed anything upon our dear ones.  "You render me liable,"
you retort, "to infinite obligation when you say 'also upon our dear
ones'; so do set some limit.  According to you, he who gives a benefit
to a son, gives it also to his father.  This is the first question I
raise.  Secondly, I should like particularly to have this point
settled.  If the benefit is given also to your friend's father, is it
given also to his brother?  Also to his uncle?  Also to his
grandfather?  Also to his wife?  Also to his father-in-law? Tell me,
where must I stop, how far am I to pursue the list of relatives?" If I
cultivate your field, I shall give you a benefit; if your house is on
fire and I shall put it out, or if I keep it from tumbling down, I
shall give you a benefit; if I heal your slave, I shall charge the
service to you; if I save the life of your son, will you not have a
benefit from me?  xxx"The instances you offer are of a different
colour, for he who cultivates my field, gives a benefit, not to the
field, but to me; and he who props up my house - to keep it from
falling, bestows a benefit on me, for the house itself is without
feeling; because it has none, he makes me his debtor; and he who
cultivates my field, wishes to do a service, not to it, but to me.  I
should say the same of the slave, he is a chattel of mine, it is to my
advantage to have his life saved; therefore the debt is mine instead
of his.  But my son is himself capable of receiving a benefit; he,
therefore, receives it, while I merely rejoice, and, though I am
nearly concerned, I am not placed under obligation by it."

Nevertheless I should like you, who suppose that you are under no
obligation, to answer me this.  A father is concerned in the good
health, the happiness, the inheritance of his son; he is going to be
made more happy if he keeps his son alive, more unhappy if he has lost
him.  What, then?  If anyone is made happier by me, if he is freed
from the danger of the greatest unhappiness, does he not receive a
benefit?

"No," you answer, "for there are some things that, though they are
conferred upon others, pass on to us; but, in each case, the thing
ought to be required of the one upon whom it was conferred, just as,
in the case of a loan, money is sought from the one to whom it was
lent, although it may by some means have come into my hands.  There is
no benefit whose advantage does not extend to those who are nearest to
the recipient, sometimes even to those who are far removed; the
question is, not whither did the benefit pass from the one to whom it
was given, but where was it first placed.  You must be repaid by the
real debtor, the one who first received it." What, then?  I beg of
you, do you not say to me: "You have given me the life of my son, and,
if he had perished, I could not have survived him"?  Do you not owe a
benefit in return for the life of one whose safety you value above
your own?  Besides, when I have saved your son's life, you fall upon
your knees, you pay vows to the gods just as if your own life had been
saved; your lips utter these words: "Whether you have saved my own
life is to me of no concern; you have saved both our lives - nay,
rather, mine." Why do vou say this if you do not receive a benefit?

"Because, also, if my son were to obtain a loan of money, I should pay
his creditor, yet should not for that reason be indebted to him;
because also, if my son should be caught in adultery, I should blush,
yet should not for that reason become an adulterer.  I say that I am
indebted to you for my son's life, not because I really am, but
because I wish to constitute myself your debtor of my own free will.
But his safety has brought to me the greatest possible pleasure, the
greatest possible advantage, and I have escaped the heaviest of all
blows, the loss of a child.  The question is now, not whether you have
been of service to me, but whether you have given me a benefit; for a
dumb animal, or a stone, or a plant, can be of service, and yet they
cannot give a benefit, for a benefit is never given without an act of
the will.  But you wish to give, not to the father, but to the son,
and sometimes you do not even know the father.  Therefore, when you
have said: 'Have I not, then, given a benefit to the father by saving
the life of his son?' you must raise the counter-question: 'Have I,
then, given a benefit to the father, whom I do not know, of whom I had
no thought?' And what if, as will sometimes happen, you hate the
father, yet save the life of his son?  Will you be considered to have
given a benefit to one to whom, at the very time that you gave it, you
had the greatest hostility?" But, to lay aside the bickering of
dialogue, and to reply, as it were, judicially, I should say that the
purpose of the giver must be considered; he gave the benefit to the
one to whom he wished it to be given.  If he did it as a compliment to
the father, then the father received the benefit; if, as a service to
the son, the father is placed under no obligation by the benefit
conferred upon the son, even if he is pleased by it.  If, however, he
gets the opportunity, he will himself wish to bestow something, not
that he feels the necessity of repaying, but that he finds an excuse
for offering a service.  Repayment of the benefit must not be sought
from the father; if he does a generous act because of it, he is, not
grateful, but just.  For there can be no end to it - if I am giving a
benefit to my friend's father, I am giving it also to his mother, his
grandfather, his uncle, his children, his relatives, his friends, his
slaves, his country.  Where, then, does a benefit begin to stop?  For
there enters in the endless sorites, to which it is difficult to set
any limit, for it grows little by little, and never stops growing.
This, too, is a common question: "If two brothers are at variance, and
I save the life of one, do I give a benefit to the, other who will
probably regret that the brother he hated did not die?" There can be
no doubt that to render a service to a man even against his will is a
benefit, just as he who has rendered a service against his will has
not given a benefit.  "Do you," you ask, "call that which vexes him,
which torments him a benefit?" Yes, many benefits are, on their face,
stern and harsh, such as the cures wrought by surgery and cautery and
confinement in chains.  The point to consider is, not whether anyone
is made unhappy, but whether he ought to be made happy, by receiving a
benefit; a coin is not necessarily a bad one because a barbarian who
does not know the government stamp has rejected it.  A man both hates,
and yet accepts, a benefit provided that it does him good, provided
that the giver gave it in order that it might do him good.  It makes
no difference whether anyone accepts a good thing with a bad spirit or
not.  Come, consider the converse case.  A man hates his brother, but
it is to his advantage to keep him; if I have killed the brother, I do
not do him a benefit, although he may say that it is, and be glad of
it.  It is a very artful enemy who gets thanked for the injury he has
done!

"I understand; a thing that does good is a benefit, a thing that does
harm is not a benefit.  But see here, I will give you an instance
where neither good nor harm is done, and yet the act will be a
benefit.  Suppose I have found the corpse of someone's father in a
lonely place, and bury it.  I have done no good either to the man
himself (for what difference would it make to him in what fashion he
rotted?), or to the son (for what advantage does he gain by the
act?)."

I will tell you what he has gained.  Using me as his instrument, he
has performed a customary and necessary duty; I supplied to his father
what he would have wished, what it would also have been his duty, to
supply himself.  Yet such an act becomes a benefit only if I performed
it, not out of the sense of pity and humanity that would lead me to
hide away anybody's corpse, but because I recognized the body, and
supposed that I was rendering a service to the son.  But, if I have
thrown earth over an unknown dead man, I have by the act made no one
my debtor for this service - I am just generally humane.  But some one
will say: "Why do vou take so much trouble to discover to whom you
should give a benefit as though you intended to ask repayment some
day?  There are some who think that repayment ought never to be asked,
and the reasons they adduce are these.  An unworthy person will not
make return even when he is asked to do so, and the worthy man will
repay of his own accord.  Moreover, if you have given to a good man,
be patient; do not do him an injustice by dunning him, as though he
would not have made return of his own accord.  If you have given to a
bad man, you must blame yourself; but do not spoil a benefit by making
it a loan.  Besides, the law, by not bidding you to ask repayment,
forbids you." These are mere words.  So long as I have no pressing
need, so long as I am not foreed by fortune, I would rather lose a
benefit than ask for repayment.  If, however, the safety of my
children is at stake, if my wife is threatened with danger, if the
safety of my country and my liberty impel me to a course that I should
prefer not to take, I shall conquer my scruples, and bear witness that
I have done everything to avoid needing the help of an ungrateful
person; the necessity of receiving a return of my benefit will at last
overcome my reluctance to ask a return.  Again, when I give a benefit
to a good man, I do so with the intention of never asking a return
unless it should be necessary.  xxx"But," you say, "the law, by not
authorizing, forbids the exaction." There are many things that do not
come under the law or into court, and in these the conventions of
human life, that are more binding than anylaw+, show us the way.  No
law forbids us to divulge the secrets of friends; no law bids us keep
faith even with an enemy.  What law binds us to keep a promise that we
have made to anyone?  There is none.  Yet I shall have a grievance
against a person who has not kept the secret I told him, and I shall
be indignant with one who, after giving a promise, has not kept it.

"But," you say, "you are turning a benefit into a loan." By no means;
for I do not demand, but request, and I do not even request, but
simply remind.  Shall even the most pressing necessity ever force me
to go to one with whom there would be need for me to have a long
struggle?  If anyone is so ungrateful that a simple reminder will not
suffice, I shall pass him by, and judge him unworthy of being
compelled to be grateful.  As a money-lender makes no demand of
certain debtors who he knows have become bankrupt, and, to their
shame, have nothing left but what is already lost, so I shall pass
over certain men who are openly and obstinately ungrateful, and I
shall ask a benefit to be repaid by no one from whom I could not hope,
not to extort, but to receive, a return.  There are many who do not
know how either to disavow or to repay what they have received, who
are neither good enough to be grateful, nor bad enough to be
ungrateful - slow and dilatory people, backward debtors, but not
defaulters. Of these I shall make no demand, but shall admonish them
and turn them back from other interests to their duty.  They will
promptly reply to me: "Pardon me; upon my word, I did not know that
you missed the money, or I would have offered it of my own accord; I
beg you not to think me ungrateful; I am mindful of your favour to
me." Why should I hesitate to make such as these better men both in
their own eyes and in mine?  If can keep anyone from doing, wrong, I
shall; much more a friend - both from doing wrong and, most of all,
from doing wrong to me.  I bestow a second benefit upon him by, not
permitting him to be ungrateful; nor will I reproach him harshly with
what I had bestowed, but as gently as I can.  In order to give him an
opportunity to show his gratitude, I shall refresh his memory, and ask
for a benefit; he will himself understand that I am asking
repayment. Sometimes if l have hope of being able to correct his
fault, I shall use harsher words; yet, if he is beyond hope, I shall
not exasperate him as well, for fear that I may turn an ingrate into
an enemy.  But if we spare ungrateful men even the affront of an
admonition, we shall make them more dilatory in returning benefits.
Some, indeed, who are curable, if conscience pricks them, and might
become good men will be left to go to ruin if we withhold the
admonition by which a father at times reclaims his son, by which a
wife brings back to her arms an erring husband, and a friend
stimulates the flagging loyalty of a friend.  In order to awaken some
men, it is necessary only to shake, not to strike, them; in the same
way, in the case of some men, their sense of honour about returning
gratitude is, not extinct, but only asleep. {Bassanio+} Let us arouse
it.  "Do not," they might say, "turn your gift into an injury; for
injury it will be if you fail to ask repayment for the express purpose
of leaving me ungrateful.  What if I do not know what you desire?
What if I have not watched for an opportunity because I was distracted
by business+ and occupied with other interests?  Show me what I can
do, what you wish me to do.  Why do you lose faith before you put me
to the test?  Why are you in a hurry to lose both your benefit and a
friend?  How do you know whether I am unwilling, or merely unaware -
whether I am lacking in opportunity, or intention?  Give me a chance!"
I shall, therefore, remind him of my benefit, not bitterly, not
publicly, not with reproaches, but in such a way that he will think
that, instead of being brought back, he himself has come back, to the
recollection of it.

One of his veterans, being greatly incensed against his neighbours,
was once pleading his case before the deified Julius, and the case was
going against him.  "Do you remember, general" he said, "the time in
Spain when you sprained your ankle near the river Sucro?" When Caesar
replied that he remembered it, he continued: "Do you remember, too,
when, because of the powerful heat of the sun, you wanted to rest
under a certain tree that cast very little shade, that one of your
fellow-soldiers spread out his cloak for you because the ground, in
which that solitary tree had sprung up among the sharp stones, was
very rough?" When Caesar replied: "Of course I do; and, too, when I
was perishing with thirst, and wanted to crawl to a nearby spring
because, crippled as I was, I could not walk, unless my companion, who
was a strong and active man, had brought me some water in his helmet -
" "Could you, then, general," interrupted the veteran, "recognize that
man, or that helmet?" Caesar replied that he could not recognize the
helmet, but that he could the man, perfectly, and, irritated I suppose
because he allowed himself to revert to the old incident in the midst
of a trial, added: "You, at any rate, are not the one." "You have good
reason, Caesar," he replied, "not to recognize me; for, when this
happened, I was a whole man; later, during the battle of Munda, one of
my eyes was torn out, and some bones were taken from my skull.  And
you would not recognize that helmet if you saw it; for it was split by
a Spanish sword." Caesar gave orders that the man was not to be
troubled, and presented his old soldier with the bit of ground which,
because his neighbours made a path through it, had been the cause of
the quarrel and the suit.

What, then?  Because his commander's memory of a benefit he received
had been dimmed by a multitude of happenings, and his position as the
organizer of vast armies did not permit him to meet individual
soldiers, should the veteran not have asked him to return the benefit
he had conferred?  This is, not so much asking for the repayment of a
benefit, as taking repayment when it lies waiting in a convenient
place, although one must stretch forth one's hand in order to take
it. I shall, therefore, ask for repayment, when either the pressure of
great necessity, or the best interest of him from whom I am asking it
shall urge me to do so.

Tiberius Caesar, when a certain man started to say "You remember - ,"
interrupted him before he could reveal more evidence of an old
intimacy with: "I do not remember what I was." Why should he not have
been asked to repay a benefit?  He had a reason for desiring
forgetfulness; he was repudiating the acquaintance of all friends and
comrades, and wished men to behold only the high position he then
filled, to think and to talk only of that.  He regarded an old friend
as an accuser! xxx It is even more needful to choose the right time
for requesting the return of a benefit than for requesting its
bestowal.  We must be temperate in our language, so that the grateful
man may not take offence, nor the ungrateful pretend to do so.  If we
lived among wise men, it would have been our duty to keep silence and
wait; and yet it would have been better to indicate even to wise men
what the condition of our affairs demanded.  We petition even the
gods, whose knowledge nothing escapes, and, although our prayers do
not prevail upon them, they remind them of us.  Homer's priest, I
say, recounts even to the gods his services and his pious care of
their altars. The second best form of virtue is to be willing and able
to take advice. The horse that is docile and obedient can easily be
turned hither and thither by a gentle movement of the reins.  Few men
follow reason as their best guide; next best are those who return to
the right path when they are admonished; these must not be deprived of
their guide.  The eyes, even when they are closed, still have the
power of sight, but do not use it; but the light of day, when it has
been admitted to them, summons their power of sight into service.
Tools lie idle unless the workman uses them to perform his task.  Our
minds all the while possess the virtuous desire, but it lies torpid,
now from their softness and disuse, now from their ignorance of duty.
We ought to render this desire useful, and, instead of abandoning it
in vexation to its weakness, we should bear with it as patiently as
schoolmasters bear with the blunders of young pupils when their memory
fails; and, just as one or two words of prompting will bring back to
their memory the context of the speech they must deliver, so the
virtuous desire needs some reminder to recall it to the repayment of
gratitude.

## ON BENEFITS BOOK VI

THERE are some matters, my most excellent Liberalis, that are
investigated simply for the sake of exercising the intellect, and lie
altogether outside of life; others that are a source of pleasure while
the investigation is in progress, and of profit when it is finished.
I shall lay the whole store of them before you; do you, as you may
feel inclined, order me either to discuss them at length, or merely to
present them in order to show the programme of the entertainment.  But
something will be gained even from those which you may order to be at
once dismissed: for there is some advantage in discovering even what
is not worth learning, I shall, therefore, watch the expression of
your face, and, according as it guides me, deal with some questions at
greater length, and pitch others headlong out of court.

The question has been raised whether it is possible to take away a
benefit.  Some say that it is not possible, for a benefit is, not a
thing, but an act.  As a gift is one thing, the act of giving another,
as a sailor is one thing, the act of sailing another, and, as a sick
man and his disease are not the same thing although a sick man is not
without discase, so a benefit is one thing, and that which anyone
receives by means of the benefit another, the benefit is incorporeal,
and is never rendered invalid; the matter of it is passed from hand to
hand, and changes its owner.  And so, when you take this away, even
Nature herself is not able to recall what she has once given. She
may break off her benefits, she cannot annul them; he who dies has
nevertheless lived; he who has lost his eyes has nevertheless seen.
Blessings that we have received can cease to be ours, but they can
never cease from having been ours; what has been, too, is part of a
benefit, and, indeed, its surest part.  Sometimes we are kept from
very long enjoyment of a benefit, but the benefit itself is not
obliterated.  Nature is not allowed to reverse her acts, though she
should summon all her powers to the task.  A man's house, his money,
his property, everything that passes under the name of a benefit, may
be taken away from him, but the benefit itself remains fixed and
unmoved; no power can efface the fact that this man has given, and
that one received.

Those seem to me noble words, which in the poet Rabirius are
ascribed to Mark Antony+, when, seeing his fortune deserting him, and
nothing left him but the privilege of dying, and even that on the
condition of his seizing it promptly, he is made to exclaim:

> Whatever I have given+, that I still possess {Akumal+}

O! how much he
might have possessed if he had wished!  These are the riches that will
abide, and remain steadfast amid all the fickleness of our human lot;
and, the greater they become, the less envy they will arouse.  Why do
vou share your wealth as though it were your own?  You are but a
steward. {trustee+} All these possessions that force you to swell with
pride, and, exalting you above mortals, cause you to forget your own
frailty; all these that you guard with iron bars and watch under arms;
stolen from others at the cost of their blood, you defend at the cost
of your own; these for which you launch fleets to dye the sea with
blood; these for which you shatter cities to destruction, uncomncsious
of how many arrows of Fortune you may be preparing for you behind your
back; these for which you have so many times violated the ties of
kinship, and of partnership, while the whole world lies crushed amid
the rivalry of two contestants - all these are not your own.  They are
committed to your safe keeping. and at any moment may find another
guardian; your enemy will seize upon them, or the heir who accounts
you an enemy.  Do you ask how you can make them your own?  By
bestowing them as gifts!  Do you therefore, make the best of your
possessions, and, by making therm, not only safer, but more
honourable, render your own claim to them assured and inviolable. The
wealth that you esteem, that, as you think, makes you rich and
powerful, is buried under an inglorious name so long as you keep it.
It is but house, or slave, or money; when you have given it away, it
is a benefit.

"You admit," says someone, "that there are times when we are under no
obligation to the man from whom we have received a benefit; it has,
therefore, been taken away." There are many things that might cause us
to cease to feel indebted for a benefit, not because it has been
removed, but because it has been ruined.  Suppose a man defends me in
a lawsuit, but has forced my wife to commit adultery; he has not
removed his benefit, but has freed me from indebtedness by matching
his benefit with an equally great wrong, and, if he has injured me
more than he had previously benefited me, he not only extinguishes my
gratitude, but leaves me free to protest and avenge myself whenever,
in balancing the two, the wrong outweighs the benefit; thus the
benefit is not withdrawn, but is surpassed.  Tell me, are not some
fathers so harsh and so wicked that it is right and proper to turn
away from them and disown them?  Have they, then, withdrawn the
benefits that they had given?  By no means, but their unfeeling
conduct in later years has removed the favour that they had won from
all their earlier service.  It is not the benefit, but gratitude for
the benefit, that is removed, and the result is, not that I do not
possess it, but that I am under no obligation for it.  It is just as
if someone should lend me money, and then set fire to my house.  The
loan has been balanced by my loss; I have made him no return, and yet
I owe him nothing.  In the same way, too, a man who has acted kindly
and generously toward me, yet later has shown himself in many ways
haughty, insulting, and cruel, places me in the position of being just
as free from any obligation to him as if I had never received
anything; he has murdered his benefits. Though the lease remains in
force, a landlord has no claim against his tenant if he tramples upon
his crops, if he cuts down his orchard; not because he received the
payment agreed upon, but because he has made it impossible to receive
it.  So, too, a creditor is often adjudged to his debtor, when on some
other account he has robbed him of more than he claims on account of
the loan.  It is not merely the creditor and debtor who have a judge
to sit between them, and say: "You lent the man money.  Very well,
then!  But you drove off his flock, you killed his slave, you have in
your possession silver that you did not buy; having calculated the
value of these, you who came into court as a creditor, must leave it
as a debtor." So, too, a balance is struck between benefits and
injuries.  Often, I say, the benefit endures, and yet imposes no
obligation. If the giver repents of his gift, if he says that he is
sorry that he gave it, if he sighs, or makes a wry face when he gives
it, if he thinks that he is, not bestowing, but throwing away, his
gift, if he gave it to please himself, or, at any rate, not to please
me, if he persists in being offensive, in boasting of his gift, in
bragging of it everywhere, and in making it painful to me, the benefit
endures, although it imposes no obligation, just as certain sums of
money to which a creditor can establish no legal right may be owed to
him though he cannot demand them.  You have bestowed a benefit upon
me, yet afterwards you did me an injury; the reward of a benefit
should be gratitude, of an injury punishment; but I do not owe you
gratitude, nor do you owe me my revenge - the one is absolved by the
other.  When we say: "I have returned to him his benefit," we mean
that we have returned, not the actual gift that we had received, but
something else in its place.  For to return is to give one thing in
return for another; evidently so, since in every act of repayment we
return, not the same object, but the same value.  For we are said to
have returned money even though we count out gold coins for silver,
and, even though no money passes between us, payment may be effected
by the assignment of a debt and orally. xxx I think I hear you saying:
"You are wasting your time; for what is the use of my knowing whether
the benefit that imposes no obligation remains a benefit.  This is
like the clever stupidities of lawyers, who declare that one can take
possession, not of an inheritance, but only of the objects that are
included in the inheritance, just as if there were any difference
between an inheritance and the objects that are included in an
inheritance. Do you, instead, make clear for me this point, which
may be of some practical use.  When the same man has bestowed on me a
benefit, and has afterwards done me an injury, ought I to return to
him the benefit, and nevertheless to avenge myself upon him, and to
make reply, as it were, on two distinct scores, or ought I to combine
the two into one, and take no action at all, leaving the benefit to be
wiped out by the injury, and the injury be the benefit?  For this is
what I see is the practice of our courts; you Stoics should know what
the law is in your school.  In the courts the processes are kept
separate, and the case that I have against another and the case that
another has against me are not merged under one formula.  If anyone
deposits a sum of money in my safekeeping, and the same man afterwards
steals something from me, I shall proceed against him for theft, and
he will proceed against me for the money deposited."

The instances that you have set forth, Liberalis, come under fixed
laws, which we are bound to follow.  One law does not merge into
another law; each proceeds along its own way.  A particular action
deals with a deposit, and just as clearly another deals with theft.
But a benefit is subject to no law, it makes me the judge.  I have the
right to compare the amount of good or the amount of harm anyone may
have done me, and then to decide whether he is more indebted to me, or
I to him.  In legal actions we ourselves have no power, we must follow
the path by which we are led; in the case of a benefit I have all the
power, I render judgement.  And so I make no separation or distinction
between benefits and injuries, but commit them both to the same judge.
Otherwise, you force me to love and to hate, and to complain and to
give thanks, at the same time; but this is contrary to nature.
Instead, after making a comparison of benefit and injury, I shall
discover whether there is still any balance in my favour.  As, if
anyone imprints other lines of writing upon my manuscript, he
conceals, though he does not remove, the letters that were there
before, so an injury that comes on top of a benefit does not allow the
benefit to be seen.

Your face, by which I agreed to be guided, is now puckered and
frowning, as though I were straying too far afield. You seem to me to
be saying:

> Whither so far to the right?  Port your helm

> Hug the shore.

I cannot more closely.  So now, if you think that I have exhausted
this question, let me pass to the next one - whether anyone who does
us a service without wishing to, imposes any obligation upon us.  I
might have expressed this more clearly, but the proposition had to be
stated somewhat obscurely in order that it might be shown by the
distinction immediately following that two questions are involved -
both whether we are under any obligation to a man who does us a
service against his will, and whether we are under obligation to one
who does us a service without knowing it.  For why a man does not
place us under obligation if he has done us some favour because he was
foreed to is so clear that no words need to be devoted to it.  Both
this question and any similar one that can be raised will be easily
settled if in every case we direct our attention to the thought that a
benefit is always something that is conveyed to us, in the first
place, by some intent, in the second place, by some intent that is
kind and friendly.  Consequently we do not expend our thanks upon
rivers even though they may bear large ships, flow in copious and
unfailing stream for the conveyance of merchandise, or wind
beauteously and full of fish through the rich farm-lands.  And no one
conceives of himself as being indebted for a benefit to the Nile, any
more than he would owe it a grudge if it overflowed its banks
immoderately, and was slow in retiring; the wind does not bestow a
benefit, even though its blast is gentle and friendly, nor does
wholesome and serviceable food.  For he who would give me a benefit
must not only do, but wish to do, me a service. We, therefore, become
indebted neither to dumb animals - and yet how many men have been
rescued from peril by the speed of a horse! nor to trees -and yet how
many toilers have been sheltered from the summer's heat by the shade
of their boughs!  But what difference does it make whether I have
received a service from someone who did not know, or from someone who
was not able to know, that he was doing it if in both cases the desire
to do it was lacking?  What difference is there between expecting me
to feel indebted for a benefit to a ship or to a carriage or to a
spear, and expecting me to feel indebted to a man who had just as
little intention as they of performing a good act, yet chanced to do
me a service?
 
Anyone can receive, but no one can bestow, a benefit without knowing
it.  Many sick persons are cured by chance happenings that are not for
that reason to be counted remedies, and a man's falling into a river
in very cold weather has restored him to health; some have had a
quartan fever broken by a flogging, and the dangerous hours passed
unnoticed because their sudden fear diverted their attention to
another trouble, and yet none of these things are for that reason to
be counted salutary, even if they have restored health.  In like
manner, certain persons do us service while they are unwilling, nay,
because they are unwilling; and yet they do not for that reason make
us indebted for a benefit, because it was Fortune that turned their
harmful designs into good.  Do you think that I am under any
obligation to a man whose hand struck my enemy when it was aimed at
me, who, unless he had blundered, would have done me an injury?  Often
a witness, by openly perjuring himself, causes even truthful witnesses
to be disbelieved, and yet arouses compassion for the man under
accusation because he seems to be beset by a conspiracy. Some men have
been saved by the very power that was exerted to crush them, and
judges, who were about to convict a man on the score of his case have
refused to convict him on the score of influence. Yet, although the
great men did him a service, it was not a benefit that they bestowed
upon the accused, because it is a question of, not what the dart hits,
but what it was aimed at, and it is, not the result, but the
intention,that distinguishes a benefit from an injury.  My opponent,
by contradicting the judge, by offending him by his arrogance, and by
rashly reducing his case to one witness, advanced my cause; I do not
consider whether his mistake helped me - he meant to do me harm.

Of course, in order to show gratitude to benefactor, I must wish to do
the same thing that he must have wished in order to give a benefit to
me.  Can anything be more unjust than to hate a person who has trodden
upon your foot in a crowd, or splashed you, or shoved you where you
did not wish to go?  Yet, since he actually does us an injury, what
besides the fact that he did not know what he was doing exempts him
from blame?  The same reason keeps this man from having given us a
benefit, and that one from having done us an injury; it is the
intention that makes both the friend and the enemy.  How many have
escaped military service because of sickness!  Some have escaped from
sharing the destruction of their house by being forced by an enemy to
appear in court, some have escaped falling into the hands of pirates
by having met with shipwreck; yet such happenings do not impose the
obligation of a benefit, because chance has no sense of the service
rendered, nor does an enemy, whose lawsuit, while it harassed and
detained us, saved our lives.  Nothing can be a benefit that does not
proceed from goodwill, that is not recognized as such by the one who
gives it.  Someone did me a service without knowing it - I am under no
obligation to him.  Someone did me a service when he wished to injure
me - I will imitate him!

Let us revert to the first type.  Would you have me do something in
order to show my gratitude?  But he himself did nothing in order to
give me a benefit!  Passing to the second type, do you wish me to show
gratitude to such a man - of my own will to return what I received
from him against his will?  And what shall I say of the third type,
the man who stumbled into doing a benefit in trying to do an injury?
To render me indebted to you for a benefit, it is not enough that you
wished to give; but, to keep me from being indebted to you, it is
enough that you did not wish to give.  For a benefit is not
accomplished by a mere wish; but, because the best and most copious
wish would not be a benefit if good fortune had been lacking, just as
truly good fortune is not a benefit unless the good wish has preceded
the good fortune.  For in order to place me under obligation to you,
you must not merely have done me a service, but have done it
intentionally.

Cleanthes makes use of the following example. "I sent," he says, "two
lads to look for Plato and bring him to me from the Academy.  One of
them searched through the whole colonnade, and also hunted through
other places in which he thought that he might be found, but returned
home alike weary and unsuccessful; the other sat down to watch a
mountebank near by, and, while amusing himself in company with other
slaves, the careless vagabond found Plato without looking for him, as
he happened to pass by.  The first lad, he says, will have our praise,
for, to the best of his ability, he did what he had been ordered; the
fortunate idler we shall flog."

It is the desire that, according to us, establishes the service; and
consider what the terms are if you would place me under obligation.
It is not enough for a man to have the wish without having done a
service; it is not enough to have done a service without having had
the wish.  For suppose that someone wished to make a gift, but did not
make it; I have, it is true, the intention, but I do not have the
benefit, for its consummation requires both an object and an
intention.  Just as I owe nothing to a man who wished to lend me
money, but did not supply it, so, if a man wished to give me a
benefit, but was not able to do so, though I shall remain a friend, I
shall be under no obligation to him; and I shall wish to bestow
something upon him (for he wished to bestow something on me), but, if,
having enjoyed better fortune than he, I shall have succeeded in
bestowing it, I shall not be returning gratitude, but shall be giving
him a benefit.  What he will owe me will be the repayment of
gratitude; the favour will begin with me, it will be counted from me.

I already know what you wish to ask; there is no need for you to say
anything; your countenance speaks for you.  "If anyone has done us a
service for his own sake, are we," you ask, "under any obligation to
him?  For I often hear you complain that there are some things that
men bestow upon themselves, but charge them up to others." I will tell
you, Liberalis; but first let me break up that question, and separate
what is fair from what is unfair.  For it makes a great difference
whether anyone gives us a benefit for his own sake, or for his own
sake and ours.  He who looks wholly to his own interest, and does us a
service only because he could not otherwise do himself a service,
seems to me to be in a class with the man who provides food for his
flock summer and winter; in a class with the man who, in order that he
may sell his captives to greater advantage, feeds them, stuffs them as
fat as oxen, and rubs them down; in a class with the fencing-master
who takes the greatest pains in training and equipping his troop of
gladiators.  There is a great difference, as Cleanthes says, between
benefaction and trade.

On the other hand, I am not so unjust as to feel under no obligation
to a man who, when he was profitable to me, was also profitable to
himself.  For I do not require that he should consult my interests
without any regard to his own, nay, I am also desirous that a benefit
given to me should be even more advantageous to the giver, provided
that, when he gave it, he was considering us both, and meant to divide
it between himself and me.  Though he should possess the larger part
of it, provided that he allowed me to share in it, provided that he
considered both of us, I am, not merely unjust, I am ungrateful, if I
do not rejoice that, while he has benefited me, he has also benefited
himself.  It is supreme niggardliness to say that nothing can be a
benefit that does not inflict some hardship upon the giver of it.

To one of the other type, the man who gives a benefit for his own sake
only, I shall reply: "Having made use of me, why have you any more
right to say that you have been of service to me, than I have to you?"
"Suppose," he retorts," that the only way in which I can obtain a
magistracy is to ransom ten out of a great number of captive citizens;
will you owe me nothing when I have freed you from bondage and chains?
Yet I shall do that for my own sake only." To this I reply: "In this
case vou are acting partly for your own sake, partly for mine - for
your own, in paying the ransom, for mine, in paying a ransom for me.
For you would have served your own interests sufficiently by ransoming
any you chose.  I am, therefore, indebted to you, not because you
ransom me, but because you choose me; for you might have attained the
same thing by ransoming someone else instead of me.  You divide the
advantage of your act with me, and you permit me to share in a benefit
that will be of profit to both of us.  You prefer me to others; all
this you do for my sake only. if, therefore, you would be made praetor
by ransoming ten captives, and there were only ten of us in captivity,
no one of us would owe you anything, for you would have nothing apart
from your own advantage which you could charge up to anyone of us.  I
do not regard a benefit jealously, nor desire that the whole of it
should be given to me, but,I desire a part."

"That, then," he replies, "if I had committed your names to a choice
by lot, and your name had appeared among those to be ransomed, would
you owe nothing to me?" Yes, I should owe something, but very little;
just how much, I will tell you.  In that case you do something for my
sake, in that you admit me to the chance of being ransomed.  I owe it
to Fortune that my name was drawn; I owe it to you that my name could
be drawn.  You gave me the opportunity to share in your benefit, for
the greater part of which I am indebted to Fortune; but I am indebted
to you for the fact that I was able to become indebted to Fortune.  I
shall wholly omit notice of those who make benefaction mercenary, for
he who gives in this spirit takes count of, not to whom, but on what
terms, he will give a benefit that is wholly directed to his own
interest.  Someone sells me grain; I cannot live unless I buy it; yet
I do not owe my life to him because I bought it.  And I consider, not
how necessary the thing was without which I could not have lived, but
how little gratitude I owe for something that I should not have had
unless I had bought it, in the transportation of which the trader
thought, not of how much help he would bring to me, but of how much
gain he would bring to himself.  What I have paid for entails no
obligation.

"According to that," you say, "you would claim that you are under no
obligation to your physician beyond his paltry fee, nor to your
teacher, because you have paid him some money.  Yet for all these we
have great affection, great respect." The answer to this is that the
price paid for some things does not represent their value.  You pay a
physician for what is invaluable, life and good health, a teacher of
the liberal sciences for the training of a gentleman and cultivation
of the mind.  Consequently the money paid to these is the price, not
of their gift, but of their devotion in serving us, in putting aside
their own interests and giving their time to us; they get paid, not
for their worth, but for their trouble.  Yet I might more truly make
another statement, which I shall at once present, having first pointed
out how your quibble can be refuted. "If," you say, "the value of some
things is greater than the price they cost, then, although you have
paid for them, you still owe me something besides." But, in the first
place, what difference does it make what they are really worth, since
the seller and the buyer have agreed upon their price?  In the second
place, I bought the thing, not at its own value, but at your price.
"It is," you retort, "worth more than it costs." Yes, but it could not
have been sold for more.  Besides, the price of everything varies with
circumstances; though vou have well praised your wares, they are worth
only the highest price at which they can be sold; a man, therefore,
who buys them cheap, owes nothing more to the seller.  Again, even if
they are worth more, nevertheless the fact that their price is
determined, not by their utility or efficacy, but by the customary
rate of the market, does not imply that there is any gift on your
part.  At what would you value the service of the man who crosses the
seas, and, when he has lost sight of the land, traces an unerring
course through the midst of the waves, who forecasts coming storms,
and suddenly orders the crew, when they have no sense of danger, to
furl the sails, to lower the tackle, and to stand ready to meet the
assault and sudden fury of the storm?  Yet this man's reward for such
great service is paid by the passenger's fare!  What value do you set
on finding lodging in a wilderness, a shelter in rain, a warm bath or
a fire in cold weather?  Yet I know at what price I can obtain these
things when I enter an inn!  How great a service does he do us who
props up our tottering house, and with unbelievable skill keeps erect
a group of buildings that are showing cracks at the bottom!  Yet a
contract for underpinning is made at a fixed and cheap rate.  The city
wall provides us protection from the enemy and from the sudden attacks
of brigands; yet it is well known how much a workman is paid each day
for erecting the towers provided with parapets to assure the public
safety.

My task would be endless if I tried to collect more instances to prove
that valuable things are sold at a low price.  What, then?  Why is it
that I owe something more to my physician and my teacher, and yet do
not complete the payment of what is due to them?  Because from being
physician and teacher they pass into friends, and we are under
obligation to them, not because of their skill, which they sell, but
because of their kindly and friendly goodwill.  If, therefore, a
physician does nothing more than feel my pulse, and put me on the list
of those whom he visits in his rounds, instructing me what to do or to
avoid without any personal feeling, I owe him nothing more than his
fee, because he views me, not as a friend, but as a commander. Nor
is there any reason why I should venerate a teacher if he has
considered me merely one of his many pupils, and has not deemed me
worthy of any particular and special consideration, if he has not
directed his attention to me, but has allowed me, not so much to learn
from him, as to pick up any knowledge that he spilled into our midst.
What reason, then, do we have for being much indebted to them?  It is,
not that what they have sold is worth more than we paid for it, but
that they have contributed something to us personally.  Suppose a
physician gave me more attention than was professionally necessary;
that it was, not for his professional reputation, but for me, that he
feared; that he was not content to indicate remedies, but also applied
them; that he sat at my bedside among my anxious friends, that he
hurried to me at the crises of my illness; that no service was too
burdensome, none too distasteful for him to perform; that he was not
indifferent when he heard my moans; that, though a host of others
called for him, I was always his chief concern; that he took time for
others only when my illness had permitted him - such a man has placed
me under obligation, not as a physician, but as a friend.  Suppose,
again, that the other endured labour and weariness in teaching me;
that, besides the ordinary sayings of teachers, there are things which
he has transmitted and instilled into me; that by his encouragement he
aroused the best that was in me, at one time inspirited me by his
praise, at another warned me to put aside sloth; that, laying hand, so
to speak, on my mental powers that then were hidden and inert, he drew
them forth into the light; that, instead of doling out his knowledge
grudgingly in order that there might be the longer need of his
service, he was eager, if he could, to pour the whole of it into me -
if I do not owe to such a man all the love that I give to those to
whom I am bound by the most grateful ties, I am indeed ungrateful.

If the hawkers of even the meanest forms of service seem to us to have
put forth unusual effort, we give them something besides what we have
agreed upon; we dispense gratuities to a pilot, to a man who works
with the commonest material, and to one who hires out his services by
the day.  Surely, in the case of the noblest professions that either
maintain or beautify life, a man is ungrateful if he thinks that he
owes no more than he bargained for.  Add, too, that in the
transmission of such knowledge mind is fused with mind; therefore,
when this happens, to the teacher, and to the physician as well, is
paid the price of his service, but the price of his mind is still
owed.  Once when Plato had been put across a river in a boat, and
found that the ferryman asked for no pay, thinking that he had been
shown a special compliment, said that the ferryman had placed Plato
under obligation to him.  But a little later, when he saw him just as
zealously convey one after another across without any charge, he
denied that the ferryman had placed Plato under any obligation to him.
For, if you wish me to feel indebted for something that you bestow,
you must bestow it, not merely upon me, but because of me; you cannot
dun any man for the dole that you fling to the crowd.  What, then?
Will no one owe you anything in return for it?  No one as an
individual; the debt that I owe in company with all I shall pay in
company with all. "Do you say," you ask, "that a man who has carried
me across the river Po in a boat without charge gives me no benefit?"
I do.  He does me a good turn, but he does not give me a benefit; for
he does it for his own sake, or, at any rate, not for mine.  In short,
even the man himself does not suppose that he is giving a benefit to
me, but he bestows it for the sake of the state, or of the
neighbourhood, or of his own ambition, and in return for it he expects
some sort of advantage quite different from that which he might
receive from individual passengers.  "What, then," you say, "if the
emperor should grant citizenship to all the Gauls, and exemption from
taxes to all the Spaniards, would the individual on account of that
owe him nothing?" Of course he would owe something, but he would owe
it, not because of a personal benefit, but because of his share in a
public benefit. "The emperor," he says, "had no thought of me at the
time when he benefited us all; he did not desire to give citizenship
to me personally, nor did he direct his attention to me; so why should
I feel indebted to one who did not put me before himself when he was
thinking of doing what he did?" In the first place, when he planned to
benefit all the Gauls, he planned to benefit me also; for I was a
Gaul, and under my national, even if not under my personal,
designation he included me.  In the second place, I shall, in like
manner, be indebted to him as having received, not a personal, but a
general, gift; being one of the people, I shall not pay the debt as
one incurred by myself, but shall contribute to it as one incurred by
my country.  If anyone should lend money to my country, I should not
call myself his debtor, nor should I declare this as my debt when a
candidate for office or a defendant in a suit; yet I will pay my
share toward quashing the indebtedness.  So I deny that a gift which
is given to an entire people makes me a debtor, because, while it was
given to me, it was not given because of me, and, while it was given
to me, the giver was not aware that he was giving to me; nevertheless
I shall be aware that I must pay something for the gift, because after
a roundabout course it arrived also at me. An act that lays me under
obligation must have been done because of me.

"According to that," you say, "you are under no obligation to the sun
or to the moon; for they do not perform their movements solely because
of you." But, since the purpose of their movements is to preserve the
universe, they perform their movements for my sake also; for I am a
part of the universe.  And besides, our position is different from
theirs; for he who does me a service in order that by means of me he
may do himself a service, has not given a benefit, because he has made
me an instrument for his own advantage.  But in the case of the sun
and the moon, even if they do us a service for their own sake, yet
their purpose in doing the service is not that by means of us they may
do themselves a service; for what is there that we can possibly bestow
on them?

"I should be sure," you say, "that the sun and the moon really wish to
do us a service if it was possible for them to be unwilling; but they
cannot help being in motion.  In short, let them halt and discontinue
their work." But see in how many ways this argument may be refuted.
It is not true that a man who is unable to refuse is for that reason
the less willing to do; nay, the greatest proof of a fixed desire is
the impossibility of its being altered. {duty+} A good man is unable
to fail to do what he does; for unless he did it, he would not be a
good man.  And, therefore, a good man gives a benefit, not because he
does what he ought to do, but because,it is not possible for him not
to do what he ought to do.  Besides, it makes a great difference
whether you say: "It is not possible for him not to do this," because
he is forced to do it, or "It is not possible for him to be
unwilling." For, if he is compelled to do it, I owe my benefit, not to
him, but to the one who forces him; if he is compelled to wish to do
it for the reason that he finds nothing better that he wishes to do,
it is a case of the man forcing himself; so, while, in the one case, I
should not be indebted to him on the ground that he was forced, in the
other, I am indebted to him on the ground that he forces himself.

"Let them cease wishing," you say.  At this point the following
question should occur to you.  Who is so crazy as to deny that an
impulse that is in no danger of ceasing and being changed into the
exact opposite can be a desire, when, on the contrary, no one must
appear more surely to have desire than one whose desire is so
completely fixed as to be everlasting? Or, if even he who is able at
any moment to change his desire may be said to have desire, shall not
he whose nature does not admit his changing a desire appear to have
desire?

"Very well! let them stop moving if they can," you say.  But you
really mean this: {Ode_to_Duty+} "Let all the heavenly 'bodies,
separated as they are by vast distances and appointed to the task of
guarding the universe, leave their posts; let sudden confusion arise,
let stars clash with stars, let the harmony of the world be destroyed,
and the divine creations totter to destruction; let the heavenly
mechanism, movin as it does with the swiftest speed, abandon in the
midst of its course the progressions that had been promised for so
many ages, and let the heavenly bodies that now, as they alternately
advance and retreat, by a timely balancing keep the world at an
equable temperature be suddenly consumed by flames, and, with their
infinite variations broken up, let them all pass into one condition;
let fire claim all things, then let sluggish darkness take its place,
and let these many gods be swallowed up in the bottomless abyss." Is
it worth while to cause all this destruction in order to convince you?
They do you a service even against your will, and for your sake they
follow their courses even if these result from some earlier and more
important cause.

Remark, too, at this point, that the gods are constrained by no
external force, but that their own will is a law to them for all
time. {duty+} What they have determined upon, they do not change, and,
consequently, it is impossible that they should appear likely to do
something although it is against their will, since they have willed to
persist in doing whatever it is impossible for them to cease from
doing, and the gods never repent of their original decision.
Undoubtedly, it is not in their power to halt and to desert to an
opposite position, but it is for no other reason than that their own
resolution holds them to their purpose; and they continue in it, not
from weakness, but because they have no desire to stray from the best
course, and it was decreed that this is the path for them to follow.
Moreover, when, at the time of the original creation, they set in
order the universe, they had regard also for our interests, and took
account of man; it cannot be thought, therefore, that they follow
their courses and display their work merely for their own sake, for we
also are a part of that work.  We are indebted, therefore, to the sun
and the moon and the rest of the heavenly host for a benefit, because,
even though the purposes for which they rise are in their eyes more
important, nevertheless in their progress toward these greater things
they do assist us.  Besides, too, they assist us in accordance with a
set purpose, and, therefore, we are placed under obligation to them,
because we do not stumble upon a benefit from those who are unaware of
their gift, but they knew that we should receive the gifts that we do;
and, although they may have a greater purpose, and greater reward for
their effort than the mere preservation of mortal creatures, yet from
the beginning of things their thought has been directed also to our
interests, and from the order bestowed upon, the world it becomes
clear that they did not regard their interest in us as a matter of
very small concern.  We owe filial duty to our parents, and yet many
at the time of their union had no thought of begetting us.  But it is
not possible for us to suppose that the gods did not know what they
would accomplish when they promptly supplied to all men food and
support, nor were those for whom they produced so many blessings
begotten without purpose.

Nature took thought of us before she created us, nor are we such a
trifling creation that we could merely have dropped from her
hand. {Nature+} See how great privilege she has bestowed upon us, how
the terms of man's empire do not restrict him to mankind; see how
widely she allows our bodies to roam, she has not confined them within
the limits of the land, but has dispatched them into every part of her
domain; see how great is the audacity of our minds, how they alone
either know, or seek, the gods, and, by directing their thought on
high, commune with powers divine.  You will discover that man is not a
hasty and purposeless creation.  Among the greatest of her works
Nature has none of which she can more boast, or, surely, no other to
which she can boast.  What madness it is to quarrel with the gods over
their gift!  How shall a man show gratitude to those to whom he cannot
return gratitude without expenditure, if he denies that he has
received anything from beings from whom he has received most of all,
from those who are always ready to give and will never expect return?
And how blind men are not to feel indebted to someone for the very
reason that he is generous even to one who denies his gift, and to
call the very continuance and succession of his benefits a proof that
he is forced to give, them!  Put in the lips of these such words as:
"I don't want it!", "Let him keep it!", "Who asks him for it?" and all
the other utterances of insolent minds.  Yet it is not true that you
are under less obligation to one whose bounty extends to you even
while you deny it, whose benefits include even this the greatest of
all - a readiness to give to you even while you complain.

Do you not see how parents force their children in the stage of tender
infancy to submit to wholesome measures?  Though the infants struggle
and cry, they tend their bodies with loving care, and, fearing that
their limbs may become crooked from too early liberty, they swathe
them in order that they may grow to be straight, and later they force
them to take a liberal education, and, if they are unwilling, resort
to the incentive of fear; finally, upon the recklessness of youth they
inculcate thrift, decency, and good habits and use force if it is too
unheedful.  As they grow up, too, and are now their own masters, if
from fear or from insubordination they refuse needed remedies,
sternness and force are applied.  And so the greatest of all benefits
are those that, while we are either unaware or unwilling, we receive
from our parents. Like those who are ungrateful and repudiate
benefits, not because they do not wish them, but in order to escape
obligation, are those who at the other extreme are too grateful, who
pray that some trouble or some misfortune may befall those who have
placed them under obligation, in order that they may have a chance to
prove how gratefully they remember the benefit they have received.  It
is debated whether they are right in doing this, and act from a
dutiful desire.  They are very much in the same state of mind as those
who are inflamed with abnormal love, who long for their mistress to be
exiled in order that they may accompany her in her loneliness and
flight, who long that she may be poor in order that she may have more
need of their gifts, who long that she may be ill in order that they
may sit at her bedside, who, though her lovers, pray for all that an
enemy might long for her to have.  And so the results of hatred and
insane love are almost the same.  Somewhat similar is the case of
those who long for their friends to have troubles in order that they
may remove them, and arrive at beneficence by doing an injury, though
it would be better for them to do nothing than by a crime to seek an
opportunity for doing a duty. What should we think if a pilot should
pray to the gods for fierce tempests and storms in order that danger
might cause more esteem for his skill? What, if a general should beg
that a vast force of the enemy might surround his camp, fill the
trenches by a sudden charge, tear down the rampart around his
panic-stricken army, and plant its hostile standards in the very gates
all in order that he might have greater glory in coming to the rescue
of his drooping and shattered fortunes?  All those who ask the gods to
injure those whom they themselves intend to help use odious means to
bring them benefits, and wish them to be laid low before they raise
them up.  To desire to injure one whom you cannot in all honour fail
to help is a sense of gratitude cruelly distorted.

"My prayer," you say, "does him no harm, because at the same time that
I wish for his danger I wish for his relief." What you mean is, not
that you do no wrong, but that you do less than if you were to wish
for his danger without wishing for his relief.  But it is wicked to
submerge a man in water in order that you may pull him out, to throw
him down in order that you may raise him up, to imprison him in order
that you may release him.  To end an injury is not a benefit, and
there is never any merit in removing a burden which the one who
removes it had himself imposed.  I would rather have you not wound me
than cure my wound.  You may gain my gratitude, not by wounding me in
order that you may have a chance to cure me, but by curing me because
I have been wounded.  There is never any pleasure in a scar except in
comparison with a wound, for, while we are glad that this has healed,
we would rather not have had it.  If you wished this to be the fortune
of one from whom you received a benefit, your desire would be cruel;
how much more cruel to wish it for one to whom you are indebted for a
benefit!

"I pray at the same time," you say,"that I may bring him aid." In the
first place - to stop you in the middle of your prayer - you at once
show yourself ungrateful; what you wish to bestow upon him I have not
yet heard, what you wish him to suffer I now know. You pray that
anxiety and fear and even some greater evil may befall him. You hope
that he may need help - this is to his disadvantage.  You hope that he
may need help from you - this is for your advantage.  You wish, not to
aid him, but to pay him; but one who shows such eagerness wishes, not
to pay, but to be freed from debt.  So the only part of your prayer
that might have seemed to be honourable is itself the base and
ungrateful feeling of unwillingness to remain under obligation; for
you hope, not that vou may have an opportunity of returning gratitude,
but that he may be under the necessity of imploring your help.  You
make yourself the superior, and force one who has done you a service
to grovel at your feet, which is wrong.  How much better would it be
to remain indebted with an honourable intention than to be released by
evil means!  You would be less guilty if you were to repudiate what
you had received; for his only loss would be what he had given.  But
as it is, you wish him to become subservient to you, by loss of his
property and change of social position to be reduced to the state of
being in a worse plight than his own benefits relieved.  Shall I count
you grateful?  Make your prayer in the hearing of the man whom you
wish to help!  Do you call that a prayer, in which a grateful friend
and an enemy might equally share, and which, if the last part were
unuttered, you would not doubt that an adversary and foe had made?
Even the enemy will sometimes hope to capture certain cities in order
to spare them, and to conquer certain men in order to pardon them, yet
these will not for that reason fail to be hostile desires, in which a
very great kindness is preceded by cruelty.  Finally, what sort of
prayers do you suppose those can be which no one will desire so little
to see fulfilled as he in whose behalf they are made?  You treat a man
very badly in wishing him to be injured by the gods, and you treat the
gods themselves unfairly in wishing him to be rescued by yourself; for
you assign a most cruel role to them, and a kindly one to yourself.
The gods must do him an injury in order that you may do him a service.
If you suborned someone to be his accuser, and then withdrew him, if
you entangled him in a lawsuit, and then suddenly quashed it, no one
would be in doubt about your baseness.  What difference does it make
whether you try. to accomplish your purpose by chicancry. or by
prayer, except that by prayer you summon against him adversaries that
are more powerful?  You have no right to say: "What harm, pray, do I
do him?" Your prayer is either futile or harmful, nay, harmful even if
it is in vain.  God is responsible for all that you fail to
accomplish, but all that you pray for is injury. Wishing is enough we
ought to be just as angry with you as if your wish were fulfilled.
"If my prayers," you say, "had had any power, they would also have had
power to bring you safety." In the first place, you desire for me
certain danger that is subject to uncertain succour.  Again, suppose
you consider both certain, the injury comes first.  Besides, while you
know the terns of your prayer, I have been caught in a storm, and am
doubtful of gaining the protection of a harbour.  Do you think what
torture it was to have needed help even if I received it?  To have
been panic- stricken even if I was saved?  To have pleaded my cause
even if I was acquitted? No matter how welcome the end of any fear may
be, firm and unshaken security is even more welcome.  Pray that it may
be in your power to repay my benefit when I shall need it, not that I
may need it.  If it were in your power, you would yourself have done
what you pray for.  How much more righteous would have been this
prayer!  "I pray that he may be in a position always to dispense
benefits, and never to need them; that he may be attended by the means
which he uses so generously in giving bounty and help to others; that
he may never have lack of benefits to bestow {Timon+} nor regret for
those bestowed; may his nature that of itself is inclined to pity,
kindness, and mercy find stimulus and encouragement from a host of
grateful persons, and may he be fortunate enough to find them without
the necessity of testing them; may none find him implacable, and may
he have need to placate none; may Fortune continue to bestow on him
such unbroken favour that it will be impossible for anyone to show
gratitude to him except by feeling it." How much more proper are such
prayers as these, which do not make you wait for an opportunity, but
show your gratitude at once! For what is there to prevent your
returning gratitude to a benefactor while his affairs are prosperous?
How many ways there are by which we may repay whatever we owe even to
the well-to-do! - loyal advice, {Kent+} constant intercourse, polite
conversation {Castiglione+} that pleases without flattery+, attentive
ears if he should wish to ask counsel, safe ears if he should wish to
be confidential, and friendly intimacy.  Good fortune has set no one
so high that he does not the more feel the want of a friend because he
wants for nothing.  This waiting for an opportunity is sorry business
the thought is to be banished and utterly rejected from every
prayer. Must the gods show their anger before you can show gratitude?
Do you not understand that you are doing wrong from the very fact that
they treat better the one to whom you are ungrateful?  Set before your
mind the dungeon, chains, disgrace, slavery, war, poverty -these are
the opportunities for which you pray.  If anyone has had dealings with
you, it is through these that he gets his discharge!  Why do you not
wish, instead, that the man to whom you owe most may be powerful and
happy?  For, as I have said, what prevents your returning gratitude
even to those who are endowed with the utmost good fortune?  The
opportunities for doing this, you will find, are ample and varied.
What! do you not know that one can pay a debt even to a rich man? Nor
shall I censure vou if you are unwilling.  Yet, granted that a man's
wealth and success may shut you off from all gifts, I will show you
what the highest in the land stand in need of, what the man who
possesses everything lacks - someone, assuredly who will tell him the
truth, who will deliver from the constant cant and falsehood that so
bewilder him with lies that the very habit of listening to flatteries
instead of facts has brought him to the point of not knowing what
truth really is.  Do you not see how such persons are driven to
destruction by the absence of frankness and the substitution of
cringing obsequiousness for loyalty?  No one is sincere in expressing
approval or disapproval, but one person vies with another in flattery,
and, while all the man's friends have only one object, a common aim to
see who can deceive him most charmingly, he himself remains ignorant
of his own powers, and, believing himself to be as great as he hears
he is, he brings on wars that are useless and will imperil the world,
breaks up a useful and necessary peace, and, led on by a madness that
no one checks, sheds the blood of numerous persons, destined at last
to spill his own. While without investigation such men claim the
undetermined as assured, and think that it is as disgraceful to be
diverted from their purpose as to be defeated, and believe that what
has already reached its highest development, and is even then
tottering, will last for ever, they cause vast kingdoms to come
crashing down upon themselves and their followers.  And, living in
that gorgeous show of unreal and swiftly passing blessings, they
failed to grasp that from the moment when it was impossible for them
to hear a word of truth they ought to have expected nothing but
misfortune. {Lear_whole_plot+}

When Xerxes declared war on Greece, everyone encouraged his puffed-up
mind that had forgotten what slender reasons he had for confidence.
One would say that the Greeks could not even endure the announcement
of war, and would take to flight at the first rumour of his arrival;
another, that there was not the slightest doubt that with that vast
force Greece could be, not only conquered, but crushed; that there was
more need to fear that his army would find the cities abandoned and
empty, and that the headlong flight of the enemy would leave but a
vast wilderness in which his forces would have no chance to display
their strength.  Another would say that the world was scarcely big
enough to contain him, that the seas were too narrow for his fleets,
the camps for his soldiers, the plains for the manoeuvres of his
cavalry forces, and that the sky was scarcely wide enough to allow
every man to hurl his darts at once.  While much boasting of this sort
was going on around him, exciting the man, who had already too high
opinion of himself, to a frantic pitch, Demaratus, the Lacedaemonian,
alone told him that that very multitude, on which he congratulated
himself, disorganized and unwieldy as it was, was in itself a danger
to its leader, for that it had, not strength, but mere weight; that
forces that were too large could never be controlled, and that an army
that could not be controlled did not last long.  "The Lacedaemonians,"
he said, "will meet you on the first mountain, and immediately give
you a foretaste of their quality.  These countless thousands of
various nations will be held in check by three hundred men"; they will
stand.firmly at their post, they will defend the pass entrusted to
them with their arms, and block the way with their bodies; all Asia
will not drive them from their position; pitifully few as they are,
they will stop all this threatened invasion and the wild onrush of
almost the whole human race.  When Nature, changing her laws, has
allowed you to traverse the sea, you will be held up on a footpath,
and will be able to estimate your later losses when you have reckoned
the price the pass of Thermopylae cost you; when you have learned that
you can be checked, you will know that you can be routed. The Greeks
will retreat before you in many places as if swept away bv some
mountain torrent that in the first onrush descends with great terror;
then from this side and that they will rise against you, and crush you
by the might of your own forces.  What is commonly said is true - your
preparations for war are too great to find room in the country that
you mean to attack, but this fact is to our disadvantage.  Greece will
conquer you, for the very reason that she has no room for you; you
cannot use the whole of you. Besides, and in this lies your only hope
of victory, you will not be able to rush forward at the first attack,
and bear aid to your men if they yield, or to support and strengthen
their wavering ranks; you will have lost the victory long before you
know that you have been conquered.  However, you may well suppose that
your army will be able to hold out for the reason that not even its
leader knows its numbers; but there is nothing so large that it cannot
perish, and, though there may be no other agents, its very size gives
birth to the cause of its destruction." It all happened as Demaratus
had predicted.  And to him who assailed the works of man and God, and
removed whatever blocked his path, three hundred men cried, "Halt,"
and, when everywhere throughout the whole of Greece the Persian had
been laid low, he understood how great a difference there was betwee
<?> n a mob and an army!  And so Xerxes, made more unhappy by his
shame than by his loss, expressed his thanks to Demaratus because he
had been the only one to tell him the truth, and permitted him to ask
any reward he pleased.  That he asked was that he should be allowed to
enter Sardis, the largest city of Asia, riding in a chariot and
wearing a tiara erect upon his head, a privilege that was accorded
only to kings.  He had earned his reward before he asked for it, but
how pitiable the nation in which the only man who told the king the
truth was one who did not tell it to himself!

The deified Augustus banished his daughter who was shameless beyond
the indictment of shamelessness, and made public the scandals of the
imperial house - that she had been accessible to scores of paramours,
that in nocturnal revels she had roamed about the city, that the very
forum and the rostrum, from which her father had proposed a law
against adultery, had been chosen by the daughter for her
debaucheries, that she had daily resorted to the statue of Marsyas,
and, laying aside the role of adulteress, there sold her favours, and
sought the right to every indulgence with even an unknown paramour.

Carried away by his anger, he divulged all these crimes, which, as
emperor, he ought to have punished, and equally to have kept secret,
because the foulness of some deeds recoils upon him who punishes them.
Afterwards, when with the lapse of time shame took the place of anger,
he lamented that he had not veiled with silence matters that he had
not known until it was disgraceful to mention them, and often
exclaimed: "If either Agrippa or Maecenas had lived, none of this
would have happened to me!" So difficult was it for one who had so
many thousands of men to repair the loss of two!  When his legions
were slaughtered, others were at once enrolled; when his fleet was
wrecked, within a few days a new one was afloat; when public buildings
were swept away by fire, finer ones than those destroyed rose in their
place.  But the place of Agrippa and Maecenas remained empty all the
rest of his life.  What!  Am I to suppose that there were no more like
them who could take their place, or that it was the fault of Augustus
himself, because he chose rather to sorrow than to search for others?
There is no reason for us to suppose that Agrippa and Maecenas were in
the habit of speaking the truth to him; they would have been among the
dissemblers if they had lived.  It is a characteristic of the kingly
mind to praise what has been lost to the detriment of what is present,
and to credit those with the virtue of telling the truth from whom
there is no longer any danger of hearing it.  But, to return to my
subject, you see how easy it is to return gratitude to the prosperous
and those who have beep placed at the summit of human power.  Tell
them, not what they wish to hear, but what they will wish they had
always heard; sometimes let a truthful voice penetrate ears that are
filled with flatteries; give them useful advice. {Kent+} Do you ask
what you can bestow on a fortunate man?  Teach him not to trust his
felicity, let him know that it must be sustained by hands that are
many and faithful.  Will you not have conferred enough upon him if you
rob him of the foolish belief that his power will endure for ever, and
teach him that the gifts of chance soon pass, and depart with greater
speed than they come; that the descent from the summit of fortune is
not made by the same stages by which it was reached, but that often it
is only a step from the height of good fortune to ruin?{Lear+} You do
not know how great is the value of friendship if you do not understand
that you will give much to the man to whom you have given a friend,
something rare not only in great houses, but in the ages, something of
which there is nowhere a greater dearth than where it is supposed most
of all to abound. What!  Do you think that those lists, which a
nomenclator a can scarcely hold either in his memory or in his hand,
are the lists of friends?  Your friends are not those who, in a long
line, knock at your door, whom you distribute into the two classes of
those to be admitted first, and those to be second!

It is an old trick of kings and those who imitate kings to divide the
company of their friends into classes, and but a part of their
arrogance to count crossing, even touching, their threshold a great
privilege, and as an honour to grant you permission to sit nearer the
front door, and to be the first to set foot inside the house, in
which, in turn,, there are any other doors that will shut out even
those who have gained admittance.  With us, Gaius Gracchus and, a
little later, Livius Drusus were the first to set the fashion of
classifying their followers, and of receiving some in privacy, some in
company with others, and others en masse.  These men, consequently,
had chief friends, ordinary friends, never true friends.  Do you call
a man who must stand in line to receive your greeting a friend?  Or
can anyone possibly reveal loyalty to you who, through doors that are
opened grudgingly, does not so much enter as sneak in?  Can anyone
reach the point of even approaching to frankness when he must take his
turn simply to say "How do you do?", the ordinary and common term of
greeting universally used by strangers?  And so, whenever you go to
wait upon any of the men whose receptions upset the whole city, even
though you find the streets beset with a huge throng of people, and
the ways jammed with the crowds of those passing in both directions,
yet you may be sure that you are going to a place full of people, but
void of friends.  We must look for a friend, not in a reception hall,
but in the heart; there must he be admitted, there retained, and
enshrined in affection.  Teach a man this - and you show gratitude!
You have a poor opinion of yourself if you are useful to a friend only
when he is in distress, if you are unnecessary when fortune smiles.
As you conduct yourself wisely in doubtful, in adverse, and in happy
circumstances by exercising prudence in case of doubt, bravery in
adversity, and restraint in good fortune, so under all circumstances
you can make yourself useful to a friend.  In adversity do not abandon
him, {Kent+} but do not wish him misfortune; none the less, without
your wishing it, in the many and varied incidents of human life, many
things will befall him that will provide you with an opportunity of
displaying your lovalty.  As he who prays that another may have riches
in the hope that he may get a share of them, has an eye to his own
interests although he offers his prayer ostensibly for the benefit of
the other, so he who prays that a friend may have some dire need from
which he may rescue him by his help and loyalty, which is really the
wish of an ingrate, sets himself before his friend, and deems it worth
while that his friend should be wretched in order that he may show
himself grateful, for this very reason proves himself ungrateful; for
he wishes to get rid of a burden, and to free himself from a heavy
load.  It makes a great difference whether you hasten to return
gratitude in order that you may repay a benefit, or in order that you
may not be under obligation.  He who wishes to repay a benefit will
adjust himself to the convenience of his friend, and will hope for the
arrival of a suitable opportunity; he who only wishes to get rid of a
burden will be eager to accomplish this by any means whatever, which
is the worst sort of wish: "This haste," you say, "shows that one is
exceedingly grateful!" I cannot express the matter more clearly than
by repeating what I have said.  You wish, not to return, but to escape
from, a benefit.  You seem to say: "When shall I be rid of it?  I must
strive in every possible way to avoid being indebted to him." If you
wished to pay a debt to him with money from his own pocket, you would
appear to be very far from being grateful.  This which you do desire
is even more unjust; for you invoke curses upon him, and call down
terrible imprecations upon the head of one whom you hold sacred.  No
one, I suppose, would have any doubt about the cruelty of
your. intention if you openly invoked upon him poverty, or captivity,
or hunger and fear.  But what difference does it make whether that is
an uttered or a silent prayer?  For someone of these things you do
desire.  But go now and suppose that it is gratitude to do what not
even an ungrateful man would do, provided he confined himself to
repudiation of the benefit, and stopped short of hatred!

Who will say that Aeneas is righteous if he wished his native city to
be captured in order that he might rescue his father from captivity?
Who will point to the Sicilian youths as good models for children if
they had prayed that Aetna, all aglow and afire, might hurl forth a
huge volume of flame with unusual violence in order to give them an
opportunity of showing their devotion their parents by rescuing them
from the midst of the conflagration?  Rome owes nothing to Scipio if
he fostered the Carthaginian War in order that he might end it. She
owes nothing to the Decii for saving their city by dying if they
prayed beforehand that they might find in some desperate need of the
state an opportunity to show their heroic devotion.  It is a burning
disgrace for a physician to try to make practice.  Many who have
aggravated and augmented an illness in order that they may win greater
fame by curing it have not been able to banish it, or have conquered
it at the cost of great suffering on the part of their victims.

It is said (at any rate Hecaton tells this story) that, when
Callistratus was going into exile, forced into it along with many
others by his factious and outrageously lawless country, and heard
someone express the hope that dire necessity might force the Athenians
to recall the exiles, he cried God forbid such a return!" xxx Our
countryman Rutilius a showed even more spirit.  When someone tried to
console him by saying that civil war was threatening, and that in a
short time all exiles would be brought back, he replied: "What sin
have I committed that you should wish me a more unhappy return than
departure?  I should much prefer to have my country blush for my exile
than weep at my return!" The exile that causes no one less shame than
the victim is not exile at all.  But as these men maintained their
duty as good citizens in being unwilling to be restored to their homes
at the cost of a public disaster, because it was better that two
should suffer from undeserved misfortune than that all should suffer
from universal misfortune, so, in like manner, he does not maintain
the character of a grateful man who wishes that another, who has done
him a service, may be loaded with troubles in order that he himself
may remove them, because, even if his purpose is good, his desire is
evil. To put out a fire that you yourself have caused does not excuse
you - still less do you credit.  In some states an unholy prayer was
treated as a crime. At any rate, at Athens Demades won a suit
against a man who sold funeral requirements, by proving that he had
prayed for great gain, and that he could not have been successful
unless many persons had died.  Yet the question is often raised
whether he was rightly convicted.  Perhaps he prayed, not that he
might sell to many, but that he might sell at a good profit - that
what he would naturally sell might be bought cheaply. Since his
business consisted in buying and selling why do you restrict his
prayer to one side of the transaction when there was gain in both?
Besides, you might convict everyone who followed that business; for
they all wish, that is, secretly pray for, the same thing.  You will
have to convict, too, a great part of the human race, for who does not
derive, gain from another's distress?  The soldier, if he wants glory,
prays for war; the farmer is cheered by the high price of grain; a
number of lawsuits raise the price of eloquence; the doctor makes
money from an unhealthy season; the vender of sybaritic wares is
enriched by the corruption of youth; if no houses should be damaged by
storm or fire, the builder's trade will suffer.  One man's prayer was
detected, but, all make a similar prayer. Or do you suppose that
Arruntius and Haterius, and all the rest who have followed the
profession of hunting legacies, do not put up the same prayers that
funeral directors and undertakers make.  Yet these do not know whose
death it is that they are praying for, while the former long for the
death of their most intimate friends, from whom on account of
friendship they have most hope of a legacy.  No one's living causes
the latter any loss, while the former are worn out if a victim is slow
in dying; they pray, therefore, not only that they may receive what
they have earned by base servitude, but also that they may be released
from the burdensome tribute. There is no doubt, therefore, that these
pray more earnestly for that which convicted the Athenian, for whoever
is likely to profit them by dying injures them by living.  Yet the
prayers of all these men, while well known, are unpunished.  Lastly,
let every man examine himself let him retire into the secrecy of his
heart, and discover what it is that he has silently prayed for.  How
many prayers there are which he blushes to acknowledge, even to
himself!  How few that we could make in the hearing of a witness!

But not everything that is blameworthy is to be considered also a
crime, as, for instance, this prayer of a friend, which we are
considering, for, while his purpose was good, his method was evil, and
he fell into the very fault he was trying to avoid.  For he is
ungrateful while he hurries - to show his gratitude.  He prays aloud:
"May he fall into my power, may he need my influence, may it not be
possible for him to find safety, honour, or security without me, may
he be so unhappy that whatever I return to him will count as a
benefit." What the ears of the gods hear is: "May he be beset by
domestic intrigues which I alone shall be able to crush, may he be
assailed by a powerful and bitter enemy, by a hostile mob supplied
with arms, may he be hard pressed by a creditor, or by an informer."
See how just you are!  You would not have prayed for any of these
things if he had not given to you a benefit.  To say nothing of your
other more serious sin in returning the worst for the best, you are
certainly at fault in not waiting for the fitting time for each
particular action, for it is as wrong to anticipate this as to fall
behind it.  As a benefit ought not always to be accepted, so it ought
not in every case to be returned.  If you were to make return to me
though I did not need it, you would be ungrateful; how much more
ungrateful you are if you force me to need it!  Wait a while!  Why are
you unwilling to allow my gift to linger in your hands?  Why do you
resent being under obligation?  Why, as though you were dealing with a
sharp usurer, are you in such a hurry to square and close your
account?  Why do you want to make trouble for me?  Why do you turn the
gods against me?  If this is your way of making repayment, what would
you do if you were exacting repayment?

Above all, therefore, Liberalis, let us learn this - to rest easy
under the obligation from benefits, and to watch for opportunities of
returning them, not to manufacture them.  Let us remember that this
very eagerness to set oneself free at the first possible moment marks
one as ungrateful; for a man is not glad to repay a benefit that he is
unwilling to owe, and one that he is not willing to keep he counts,
not a gift, but a burden.  How much better and more seemly it is for a
man to keep in view the services of friends, and to offer, not to
obtrude, his own, and not to count himself a mere debtor; for a
benefit is a common bond and binds two persons together.  Say: "I make
no delay in returning what is yours; I hope you will gladly accept it.
If a cruel fortune threatens either of us, and some fate decrees
either that you must accept return of your benefit, or that I must
accept a second one, let him give by preference who is used to giving.
I am ready:

> 'Tis not for Turiius to delay.

This is the spirit I shall show
whenever the time comes; meanwhile the gods are my witnesses."

I have often observed in you, Liberalis, and, as it were, "laid hand
on" a feeling of nervous fear that you might be remiss in the
performance of any duty.  Anxiety ill becomes the grateful heart,
which, on the contrary; should show the utmost self-confidence and
that all worry has been banished because of the consciousness of true
love.  To say "Take back" casts as much reproach as to say "You owe."
Let this be the first rule in giving a benefit, that the right to
choose the time of having it returned is the giver's.  But you say: "I
am afraid that men will talk about me later." If a man is grateful,
not because of his conscience, but because of his reputation, his
motive is wrong.  You have in this matter two judges - your
benefactor, whom you ought not to fear, and yourself, whom you cannot
fear.  "What, then," you say, "if no opportunity comes?  Shall I
always remain in debt?" You will remain in debt, but openly in debt,
gladly in debt - you will view with great pleasure what has been left
in your hands.  A man who is irked at not having returned a benefit is
sorry that he received it.  Why, if you thought a man was worthy to
make you his debtor, do you think that he is unworthy of your
remaining long in debt?

Those who think that to proffer and to bestow and to fill many men's
pockets and houses with their gifts are proof of a great soul make a
great mistake, since sometimes these are due, not so much to a large
soul, as to a large fortune; {Timon+} they do not know how much
greater and more difficult it is at times to take, than to lavish,
gifts.  For, although I would not disparage either act, since both are
of equal value when Virtue directs them, to become indebted for a
benefit requires no smaller spirit than to give it; of the two, the
former, in fact, is the more laborious, as greater effort is expended
in guarding, than in giving, the objects that are received.  Therefore
we ought not to be worried over how soon we can repay, nor should we
rush to do so at an unseemly time, for he who hastens to return
gratitude at the wrong time is as much at fault as he who is remiss in
returning it at the proper time.  He has placed his gift in my hands;
I have no fear on his account or on my own.  He has good security; he
cannot lose his benefit unless he loses me, nay, not even if he loses
me.  I have paid him my thanks - that is, I have made return.  He who
thinks too much about returning a benefit must suppose that the other
thinks too much about having it returned.  One should lend himself to
both points of view.  If a man wishes his benefit to be returned, let
us repay and return it cheerfully; if he prefers that it should remain
in our custody, why do we dig up his treasure?  Why do we refuse to
guard it?  He deserves to be allowed to do whichever he pleases, As
for rumour and reputation, let us consider them as matters that must,
not guide, but follow, our actions.

## ON BENEFITS BOOK VII

BE of good cheer, Liberalis

> The land is close - I will not keep you long

>By rambling outbursts of a long-drawn song.

This book gathers up the remnants, and, after the
subject has been exhausted, I am casting about to discover, not what I
shall say, but what I have not said.  If there is anything in it that
could be omitted, you will take it in good part, since it was for your
sake that I did not omit it.

If I had wished to curry favour for myself, I ought to have let my
work grow gradually in interest, and to have reserved for the last a
part that any reader would be eager for even if he were surfeited.
But all that is most essential I have massed together at the
beginning; now I am merely recovering whatever escaped me.  Nor,
seriously, if you ask me, do I think that, after stating the rules
that govern conduct, there is very much point in my pursuing the other
questions that have been raised, not to further the health of the
mind, but to provide exercise for the intellect.

For Demetrius the Cynic, a great man, in my opinion, even if compared
with the greatest, is fond of stating very admirably that it is far
better for us to possess only a few maxims of philosophy that are
nevertheless always at our command and in use, than to acquire vast
knowledge, that notwithstanding serves no practical purpose.  "Just
as," he says, "the best wrestler is not one who is thoroughly
acquainted with all the postures and grips of the art, which he will
seldom use against an adversary, but he who has well and carefully
trained himself in one or two of them, and waits eagerly for the
opportunity to use them - for it makes no difference how much he knows
if he knows, enough to give him the victory - , so in this effort of
ours there are many points that are interesting, few that are
decisive.  Though you may not know what principle causes the ebb and
flow of the ocean tides, why every seventh year leaves its mark on the
life of a man, why the width of a colonnade, when you look at it from
a distance, does not keep its true proportion, but towards the end
grows narrower, and at last the spaces between the columns disappear,
why it is that twins are conceived separately, but are born together,
whether in coition one act gives birth to two, or each is born from a
separate act, why those who are born together have different
destinies, and, though their births were very close together, are very
far apart in the differences of their experiences it will not do you
much harm to pass over matters which it is neither possible nor
advantageous for you to know. {Prospero+} Truth lurks in deep hiding
and is wrapped in mystery.  Nor can we complain that Nature is
grudgingly disposed towards us, for there is nothing that is hard to
discover except that which, when discovered, brings no other reward
than the fact of discovery; all that tends to make us better and
happier has been placed either in plain sight or nearby.  The soul
that can scorn all the accidents of fortune, that can rise superior to
fears, that does not greedily covet boundless wealth, but has learned
to seek its riches from itself; the soul that can cast out all dread
of men and gods, and knows that it has not much to fear from man and
nothing from God; that, despising all those things which, while they
enrich, harass life, can rise to the height of seeing that death is
not the source of any evil, but the end of many; the soul that can
dedicate itself to Virtue, and think that every path to which she
calls, is smooth; that, social creature that it is and born for the
common good, views the world as the universal home of mankind, that
can bare its conscience to the gods, and, respecting itself more than
all others, always live as if in the sight of men - such a soul,
remote from storms, stands on the solid ground beneath a blue sky, and
has attained to perfect knowledge of what is useful and essential.
All other matters are but the diversions of a leisure hour; for when
the soul has once found this safe retreat, it may also make excursions
into things that bring polish, not strength, to its
powers. {Stoicism_basic+}

These are the things that my friend Demetrius says the tiro in
philosophy must grasp with both hands, these are the precepts that he
must never let go, nay, must cling fast to, and make a part of
himself, and by daily meditation reach the point where these wholesome
maxims occur to him of their own accord, and are promptly at hand
whenever they are desired, and the great distinction between base and
honourable action presents itself without any delay.  Let him know
that there is no evil except what is base, and no good except what is
honourable.  Let him apply this rule to all the deeds of life; in
accordance with this law let him both order and weigh all his actions,
and those who are given over to gluttony and lust, whose minds are
deadened by sluggish inaction, let him judge to be the most wretched
of mortals, no matter how great the splendour of their wealth may be.
Let him say to himself: "Pleasure is frail, shortlived, and prone to
pall; the more eagerly it is indulged, the more swiftly it changes
into the opposite, it forces us straightway either to repentance or to
shame, it has in it nothing of nobility, nothing worthy of the nature
of man, second as he is to the gods, a lowly thing, produced by
subservience to the parts of our body that are either base or vile,
and in the end repulsive.{Lear_disgust+} True pleasure, worthy either
of man or hero, comes, not from filling and gorging the body and from
exciting the lusts that are safest when they are quiet, but from
freedom from all mental disturbance, both that which is aroused by the
ambition of men struggling with one another, and that which comes,
insufferably, from on high when we give credence to the stories of the
gods, and estimate them by the standard of our own vices." This is the
pleasure, constant, serene, always uncloyed, that is experienced by
the man we were just now delineating, one skilled, so to speak, in the
laws of gods and men.  Such a man rejoices in the present, and puts no
faith in the future; for he who leans upon uncertainties can have no
sure support. Free, therefore, from the great anxieties that rack the
mind, there is nothing which he hopes for or covets, and, content with
what he has, he does not plunge into what is doubtful. {Foresight+}

And do not suppose that he is content with a little - all things are
his, and not in the sense in which they were Alexander's, who,
although he stood upon the shore of the Indian Ocean, had need of more
territory than that he had passed through.  Nor did he own even the
kingdoms that he was holding or had conquered, while Onesicritus,
who had been sent ahead to discover new ones, was wandering about the
ocean and stirring up war on unknown seas.  Was it not quite clear
that it was a man in need who pushed his arms beyond the bounds of
Nature, who, driven on by reckless greed, plunged headlong into an
unexplored and boundless sea?  What difference does it make how many
kingdoms he seized, how many he bestowed, how many lands submitted to
tribute?  He still had need of as much as he still coveted.

Nor was this the vice of Alexander alone, whose successful audacity
led him to follow in the footsteps of Liber and Hercules, but of all
those whom Fortune has goaded on by rich gifts.  Consider Cyrus and
Cambyses and all the royal line of Persia.  Will you find any among
them who was satisfied with the bounds of his empire, who did not end
his life in some plan of advancing farther?  Nor need we wonder; for
whatever is gained by covetousness is simply swallowed up and buried,
nor does it make any difference how much you pour into a vessel that
can never be filled.

It is only the wise man who has all things, and has no difficulty in
retaining them.  He has no need to send legates across the seas, nor
to measure out camps on hostile shores, nor to place garrisons in
strategic forts - he has no need of a legion or squadrons of cavalry.
Like the immortal gods who govern their realm without recourse to
arms, and still from their serene and lofty heights safeguard their
own, so the wise man performs his duties, however far reaching they
may be, without any turmoil, and, being the most powerful and best of
mankind, sees the whole human race beneath him.  Smile though you may,
yet if you survey the East and the West with your thought, which can
penetrate even to lands that are far removed and shut off by vast
wastes, if you behold all creatures of earth, all the bounteous store,
which Nature so richly pours forth, it is the claim of no mean spirit
to be able to utter these words of God: "All these things are
mine!"{Wdswth+} {Satan+} Thus it comes that he covets nothing because
there is nothing outside of the all.

"This," you say, "is the very thing I wanted; I have caught you!  I
want to see how you will release yourself from this trap into which
you have fallen of your own accord.  Tell me this.  If the wise man
possesses everything, how can anyone possibly give anything to a wise
man?  For even what one gives to him is already his.  It is
impossible, therefore, to bestow a benefit on a wise man, for whatever
is given to him is given out of his own store; yet you Stoics say that
it is possible to give to a wise man.  Know, too, that I raise the
same question also with reference to friends.  You say that they have
all things in common; {Friend+ no one, consequently can give anything
to a friend; for he gives to him what is common property.

There is nothing to prevent a thing's belonging both to the wise man
and to him who actually possesses it as something that was granted and
assigned to him.  According to civil law everything belongs to the
king, and yet property, to which the king lays claim by his universal
right, is parcelled out to individual owners, and each separate thing
is someone's personal possession.  And so we are able to give to a
king a house, or a slave, or money, and are not said to be bestowing
upon him a gift of his own property; for the right of ownership of all
things belongs to the king, the actual ownership to the individual
citizen,

We speak of the territories of the Athenians and the Campanians,
which, in turn, the dwellers divide among themselves by private
agreements; and while the whole land is undoubtedly the property of
any commonwealth, each part of it in turn is reckoned as the
possession of its owner; and we are able, therefore, to present our
lands to the state, although they are said to belong to the state,
because, in one way, they are the state's, in another, mine.  Can
there be any doubt that a slave, along with his private savings,
belongs to his master?  Yet he can give a present to his master.  For
it is not true that a slave owns nothing for the mere reason that he
will not be able to own it if his master should be unwilling for him
to own it, nor is it true that he does not give a present, when he
gives it willingly, for the mere reason that it could have been seized
from him even if he had been unwilling, How can we prove everything?
For we are now both agreed that the wise man possesses all things; the
question that we must settle is how there can remain any means of
showing generosity to one to whom we have granted all things
belong. All things that are in the hands of his children belong to the
father; yet who does not know that even a son can make a gift to his
father?  All things belong to the gods; yet we both offer gifts to the
gods, and throw them alms. It is not necessarily true that what I
have is not mine if what is mine is also yours; for it is possible
that the same thing may be both mine and yours.

"He to whom courtesans belong," you say, "is a pimp; but all things
belong to a wise man, and all things must also include courtesans;
therefore courtesans belong to a wise man.  But he to whom courtesans
belong is a pimp; therefore a wise man is a pimp." In the same way
they forbid him to buy anything, for they say: "No one buys his own
property; but all things belong to the wise man; therefore the wise
man buys nothing." In the same way they forbid him to take a loan,
because no one is going to pay interest for the use of his own money.
They raise endless quibbles, although they perfectly well understand
what we mean.  For I mean that, while all things belong to the wise
man, each person, nevertheless, has the ownership of his own property,
just as under the best sort of king everything belongs to the king by
his right of authority, and to his subjects by their individual rights
of ownership.  The time will come for proving this statement;
meanwhile the question in hand will be sufficiently answered if I say
that it is possible for me to give to the wise man something that, in
one way, belongs to the wise man, and, in another way, belongs to
me. Nor is it surprising that it is possible to give something to one
who possesses all there is.  Suppose I have rented a house from you;
you still have some "right" in it, and I have some right - the
property is yours, the use of the property is mine.  Nor, likewise,
will you touch crops, although, they may be growing on your own
estate, if your tenant objects; and if the price of corn becomes too
dear, or you are starving, you will

> Alas! in vain another's mighty store behold,

grown upon your own
land, lying upon your own land, and about to be stored in your own
granary.  Nor, although you are the owner, will you set foot on what I
have rented, nor will you take away a slave of yours, now a hireling
of mine; and if I have hired a carriage from you, you will be
receiving a benefit if I permit you to sit in your own vehicle.  You
see, therefore, that it becomes possible for someone to receive a
present by receiving what is his own.  In all these cases that I have
just cited there are two owners of one and the same thing.  How is it
possible?  Because one is the owner of the thing, the other of the use
of the thing.  We say that certain books are Cicero's; Dorus, the
bookseller, calls these same books his own, and both statements are
true.  The one claims them, because he wrote them, the other because
he bought them; and it is correct to say that they belong to both, for
they do belong to both, but not in the same way.  So it is possible
for Titus Livius to receive his own books as a present, or to buy them
from Dorus.  Although all things belong to a wise man, yet I am able
to give to him what is individually mine; for, although he is
conscious of possessing all things in the manner of a king, yet the
ownership of the several things is divided among individuals, and it
is possible for him to receive a present and to be indebted and to buy
and to hire.  Everything belongs to Caesar, yet the only private and
personal property he has is the imperial treasury; all things are his
by right of his authority, but his personal property is acquired by
right of inheritance.  The question may be raised as to what is his,
and what is not his, without assailing his authority; for even that
which the court may decide belongs to another, from another point view
belongs to him.  So in his mind the wise man possesses all things, by
actual right and ownership only his own things.

Bion at one time proves by argument that all men are sacrilegious,
at another, that no one is.  When he is disposed to hurl all men from
the Tarpeian Rock, he says: "Whoever abstracts and consumes and
appropriates to his own use what belongs to the gods, commits
sacrilege; but all things belong to the gods; that which anyone
abstracts, therefore, he abstracts from the gods, to whom all things
belong; consequently, whoever abstracts anything commits sacrilege."
Again, when he bids men to break into temples and to pillage the
Capitol without fear of punishment, he says that no one commits
sacrilege, because whatever is abstracted from one place that belongs
to the gods is transferred to another place that belongs to the gods.

The answer to this is that, while it is true that all things belong to
the gods, all things are not consecrated to the gods, and that only in
the case of the things that religion has assigned to a divinity is it
possible to discover sacrilege.  That thus, also, the whole world is
the temple of the gods, and, indeed, the only one worthy of their
majesty and grandeur, and yet that there is a distinction between
things sacred and profane; that not all things which it is lawful to
do under the open sky and in the sight of the stars are lawful to do
in the nook to which has been assigned the name of a sanctuary.  The
sacrilegious man is not able, indeed, to do any injury to God, whose
own divinity has placed him beyond the reach of harm, yet he is
punished because he aimed an injury at God - he is subjected to
punishment by our feeling and his own.  As, therefore, he who carries
off something sacred seems to have cornmitted a sacrilege, even if the
place to which he has transferred what he had stolen is within the
limits of the world, so it is possible for a theft to be committed
upon even a wise man, for he will be robbed of something, taken, not
from that universe which he possesses, but from the things of which he
is the registered owner, and which are at his individual service.  He
will claim his ownership of the former, ownership of the latter he
will be unwilling to have even if he is able, and will give voice to
the famous words that a Roman general uttered when, as a reward for
his prowess and his good service to the state, he was being awarded as
much land as he could have covered in one day's ploughing; "You have
no need," said he, "of a citizen who needs to have more than is
necessary for one citizen." How much more a hero will you think him
for having rejected this gift than for having deserved it!  For many
have removed the boundary lines of other men's lands, no one has set
limits to his own!  When, therefore, we behold the mind of the wise
man, master as it is of all things and a ranger of the universe, we
say that all things belong to him, although, according to our
every-day law, his only assessment, it may be, will be a head-tax.  It
makes a great difference whether his holdings are estimated by the
censor's register, or by the greatness of his mind.  He will pray to
be delivered from the ownership of all the things of which you speak.

I shall not remind you of Socrates, of Chrysippus, of Zeno, and the
others, truly great men - in fact, too great, because envy sets no
bounds to our praise of the ancients.  But a little while ago I
reminded you of Demetrius, whom, it seems to me, Nature produced in
these times of ours in order to prove that he could not be corrupted
even by us, and that we could not be reproved even by him - a man of
consummate wisdom, though he himself disclaimed it, of steadfast
firmness in all his purposes, of an eloquence fitted to deal with the
mightiest subjects, not given to graces, nor finical about words, but
proceeding to its theme with great spirit, as impulse inspired
it. {PlainDealer+} I doubt not that this man was endowed by divine
providence with such a life, with such power of speech in order that
our age might not lack either a model or a reproach. If some god
should wish to commit all our wealth to the hands of Demetrius on the
fixed condition that he should not be allowed to give it away, I am
ready to assert that he would refuse it, and say: "Really, I cannot be
bound down by this inextricable burden, nor, unhampered as I now am,
do I mean to be dragged down to the dregs of existence.  Why do you
offer to me what is the bane of all peoples?  I would not accept it
even if I intended to give it away, for I see many things that are not
fit for me to bestow.  I wish to set clearly before myself the things
that blind the eyes of nations and kings, I wish to behold the
recompenses for your life-blood and your lives.  Array before me first
the trophies of Luxury, spreading them out in a row, if you wish, or,
as is better, piling them into one heap.  I see there the shell of the
tortoise, a most ugly and sluggish creature, bought for huge sums and
embellished with elaborate markings, and the very variety of their
colours, which is their chief attraction, is accentuated by the
application of dyes that resemble the natural tint. I see there tables
of wood, valued at the price of a senatorial fortune, and the more
knotted the contortions of the unhappy tree, the more precious it
is.  I see there objects of crystal, whose very fragility enhances
their price; for to the ignorant mind, the pleasure of all things is
increased by the very risk that ought to drive pleasure away.  I see
there murrine cups - men, forsooth, would pay too little for their
luxury unless, when they toasted each other, they had precious stones
to hold the wine they will vomit up!  I see pearls - not single ones
designed for each ear, but clusters of them, for the ears have now
been trained to carry their load; they are joined together in pairs,
and above each pair still others are fastened; feminine folly could
not sufficiently have overwhelmed men unless two or three fortunes had
hung in each ear!  I see there raiments of silk - if that can be
called raiment, which provides nothing that could possibly afford
protection for the body, or indeed modesty, so that, when a woman
wears it, she can scarcely, with a clear conscience, swear that she is
not naked.  These are imported at vast expense from nations unknown
even to trade, in order that our married women may not be able to show
more of their persons, even to their paramours, in a bedroom than they
do on the street.  And how, O Avarice, dost thou fare?  How many are
the things that in costliness have surpassed thy gold!  All those that
I have mentioned are more honoured and valued.  Now I wish to review
thy wealth, the plates of gold and silver, for which our greed gropes
in darkness.  Yet in very truth, the earth, which has revealed
everything that was likely to be of use to us, has hidden these
things, and buried them deep, and weighted them down with all her
mass, regarding them as harmful substances, destined to be a curse to
the nations if brought forth into the light.  I see that iron has been
brought forth from the same dark depths that yielded gold and silver
in order that we might not lack either the instrument or the reward
for slaughtering one another.  And yet the forms of thy wealth, so
far, have some actual substance; but there is another in which the
mind and the eye alike can be deceived.  I see there allotments,
bonds, and securities - the empty phantoms of ownership, the secret
haunts of Avarice devising some means by which she may deceive the
mind that delights in empty fancies.  For what are these things, what
are interest and the account-book and usury, but the names devised for
unnatural forms of human greed? {Shylock+}

"I might make complaint against Nature because she did not hide gold
and silver more deeply, because she did not lay a weight upon them too
heavy to be removed - but these bills of thine, what are they? what
the computations and the sale of time and the blood-thirsty twelve per
cent?  Evils that we will, that originate from our own character, that
have in them nothing which can be put before the eyes, nothing that
can be held in the hand - the mere dreams of empty Avarice!  Wretched,
indeed, is he who can take delight in the huge record of his estate,
in his vast tracts of land that need to be tilled by men in chains, in
huge herds and flocks that need whole provinces and kingdoms to
provide them with pasture, and in private palaces that cover more
ground than great cities!  When he has carefully reviewed all his
wealth, in what it is invested and on what it is squandered, and is
puffed up with pride, let him compare all that he has with what he
still covets, and he is a poor man!  Let me go - restore me to the
riches that are mine.  I know the kingdom of wisdom, a mighty, a
secure kingdom - I possess all in the sense that all things belong to
all!" And so, when Gaius Caesar wanted to give Demetrius two hundred
thousand, he laughingly refused it, not even deeming it a sum the
refusal of which was worth boasting about!  Ye gods and goddesses,
what a petty mind Gaius showed in trying either to compliment or to
corrupt him!  I must here render testimony to the distinction of the
man.  I heard him say a fine thing when be expressed surprise at the
madness of Gaius in supposing that he could have been influenced by
such an amount.  "If he meant to tempt me," said he, "he ought to have
tested me by offering me his whole kingdom." xxx It is possible,
consequently, to bestow a gift on a wise man even if all things belong
to the wise man.  And, just as truly, there is nothing to prevent my
making a gift to a friend, although we say that friends have all
things in common.  For I have all things in common with my friend, not
as I would with a partner, when one share would belong to me, and
another to him, but as children are the common possession of their
father and mother, who, if they have two, do not each claim one, but
they each claim two.

First of all, I shall now proceed to show that every man who invites
me to enter into partnership with him, knows well that he possesses
nothing in common with me.  And why ?  Because this community of goods
{common_property+} can exist between wise men only, who alone are
capable of knowing friendship; the rest are just as little friends as
they are partners.

In the second place, there are many ways of owning things in common.
The seats reserved for the knights belong to all the Roman knights -
yet of these the seat that I have occupied becomes my own property,
and, if I surrender it to anyone, I am supposed to have given him
something although I have only surrendered to him what was common
property.  Certain things belong to certain persons under particular
conditions. I have a seat among the knights, not to sell, not to let,
not to dwell in, but to use only for the purpose of viewing the
spectacle.  Therefore I am not speaking an untruth when I say that I
have a seat in the equestrian rows.  But, if the equestrian rows are
full when I enter the theatre, I both have a right to a seat there,
because I have the privilege of sitting there, and have not a right,
because the seat is occupied by those who have with me a common right
to the space.  Consider that the same relation exists between friends.
Whatever our friend possesses is common to us, but it is the property
of the one who holds it; I cannot use the things against his will.
"You are making fun of me," you say; "if what belongs to my friend is
mine, I have a right to sell it." Not so; for you have no right to
sell the equestrians' seats, and yet they belong to you in common with
the other knights.  The fact that you cannot sell something, or
consume it, or alter it for the better or worse is, in itself, no
proof that it does not belong to you; for something that is yours
under particular conditions is nevertheless yours. . . .  I have
received, but at any rate not less.  Not to prolong the discussion, a
benefit cannot be more than a benefit; but the means employed to
convey a benefit may be both greater and more numerous - the things in
which, in short, one's benevolence runs riot, and indulges itself as
lovers are wont to do, for these by their more numerous kisses and
closer embraces do not increase their love, but give it play.

This other question, which now comes up, has been exhausted in the
earlier books, and will, therefore, be touched upon briefly; for the
arguments that have been given for other cases may be transferred to
this.  The question is, whether anyone who has done everything in his
power to return a benefit has returned it.  "You may be sure," you
say, "that he has not returned it, for he did everything in his power
to return it; it is evident, therefore, that he did not accomplish his
purpose if he failed to find opportunity for its accomplishment.  And
a man does not discharge his debt to a creditor if he searches
everywhere for money in order to be able to discharge it, and yet has
not found it." Some efforts are of such a character that they are
bound to achieve their end; in the case of others, to have tried in
every way to achieve an end takes the place of achievement.  If a
physician has made every effort to effect a cure, he has performed his
part; the pleader, if he has used all the power of his eloquence,
fulfils his duty even if his client is convicted; praise for his
generalship is bestowed even upon a vanquished commander if he has
performed his duties with prudence, with diligence, and with bravery.
A man has made every effort to return your benefit, but your good
fortune stood in his way; no hardship befell you which could put his
true friendship to the test; he could not give to you when you were
rich, nor sit at your bedside when you were not sick, nor succour you
when you had no misfortune - this man has repaid gratitude even if you
have not received the return of your benefit.  Moreover, he who is
always intent upon this, is on the watch for an opportunity of doing
it, and expends upon it much thought and much anxiety, has taken more
trouble than one who has had the good fortune to repay his gratitude
quickly.  Quite different is the case of the debtor, for it is not
enough for him to have sought for the money unless he pays it; for in
his case a harsh creditor stands over him, who suffers not a single
day to pass without charging him interest; in your case there is a
very generous friend, who, if he saw you rushing about and troubled
and anxious, would say:

"This trouble from thy breast expel; cease to cause yourself
concern.  I have all that I want from you; you do me an injustice if
you suppose that I desire from you anything further; your intention
has reached me most fully."

"Tell me," you say: "if he had returned the benefit, you would say
that he has shown gratitude; are both, therefore, in the same position
the one who did not retyrn it?"
 
On the other hand, consider this. If he had forgotten the benefit he
had received, if he had not even tried to be grateful, you would say
that he had not shown gratitude.  Yet this other man has worn himself
out night and day, and, neglecting all his other duties, has
concentrated on this single one, and has taken pains not to let any
opportunity escape him.  Will, therefore, he who has put aside all
concern about showing gratitude and he who has never ceased to be
concerned be considered in the same class?  You are unjust if you
require me to pay in fact when you see that I have not failed in
intention.  In short, suppose, when you had been taken captive, that
I, having borrowed money, and having made over my property to my
creditor as security, set sail along shores infested with pirates in
the midst of winter with all its fierceness, and traversed all the
perils that even a peaceful sea can offer; that, having wandered,
through all wildernesses, in search of men from whom every one else
was fleeing, I at last reached the pirates, and found that someone
else had ransomed you - will you say that I have not repaid gratitude?
Even if, during that voyage, I was shipwrecked, and lost the money
that I had raised to rescue you, even if I myself have fallen into the
chains which I hoped to remove from you, will you say that I have not
repaid gratitude? No, by the gods! - the Athenians call Harmodius and
Aristogiton "tyrannicides," and the hand that Mucius left on the
enemy's altar was as glorious as if it had killed Porsina, and the
valour that struggles against fortune always wins lustre even if it
fails to accomplish the task set before it.  He who pursues
opportunities that elude him, and clutches at them one after another
in order that he may be able to have the means of showing his
gratitude, renders far more than he who without strenuous effort
proves himself grateful at the first opportunity.

" But," you say, "your benefactor bestowed on you two things, his
property and his goodwill; you, likewise, owe him two." You might say
this very properly to one who returns to you goodwill without further
effort, but you cannot say it to one who both wishes and makes effort,
and leaves nothing untried; for, so far as it is in his power, he
bestows on you both.  Again, it is not always desirable to pit number
against number; sometimes one thing has the value of two; and so such
ardent and eager desire to repay takes the place of repayment.  And,
if the intention without a material offering has no value in repaying
gratitude, no one shows himself grateful to the gods, to whom the only
contribution that we make is goodwill.  "We cannot," you say, " bestow
anything else on the gods." But, if I am also unable to bestow
anything else on a man to whom I ought to return gratitude, why is it
that the only means that I have of showing my gratitude to the gods
does not permit me to show myself grateful to a man?

If, however, you ask me what I think, and wish me to set my seal on
the reply, I should say that the one should consider that he has
received the return of his benefit, while the other should know that
he has not returned it; the one should release the other, while the
other should feel himself bound; the one should say, "I have
received," the other, "I still owe." In the case of every question,
let us keep before us the public good; the door must be closed to all
excuses, to keep the ungrateful from taking refuge in them and using
them to cover their repudiation of the debt.  "I have done all in my
power," says he.  Well, keep on doing so. Tell me, do you suppose that
our forefathers were so foolish as not to understand that it was most
unjust to consider a man who wasted in debauchery or gambling the
money he had received from a creditor to be in the same class with one
who lost the borrowed property along with his own in a fire, or by
robbery, or some other major mishap?  Yet they accepted no excuses in
order to teach men that a promise must be kept at all costs; in their
eyes it was better that a few should not find even a good excuse
accepted than that all should resort to excuse.  You have done
everything in order to make return; this should be enough for your
benefactor, it should not be enough for you.  For, just as he is
unworthy of being repaid with gratitude if he permits all your earnest
and diligent effort to pass as nothing, so, if anyone accepts your
goodwill as full payment, you are ungrateful if you are not all the
more eager to acknowledge your indebtedness because he has released
you.  Do not snatch up your releaser nor demand witnesses; no whit the
less should you seek opportunities for making full return. Return to
one because he demands repayment, to another because he releases you
from the debt; to the former, because he is bad, to the latter,
because he is good.

There is, consequently, no reason why you should suppose that you have
any concern with the question of whether a man ought to return the
benefit that he has received from a wise man if he has ceased to be
wise and has turned into a bad man.  For you would return a deposit
that you had received from a wise man even if he had become bad, you
would return a loan.  What reason is there why you should not return a
benefit also?  Because he has changed, should he change you?  Tell me,
if you had received anything from a man when he was well, would you
not return it to him if he were sick, seeing that a friend's weakness
always increases our obligation to him?  This other also is sick - but
in his mind; we should help him, and bear with him.  The mind's
illness is folly.

In order that the matter may become more intelligible, I think that
here I ought to make a distinction.  Benefits are of two kinds - one,
the perfect and true benefit, which only a wise man can give to none
but a wise man; the other, the everyday, common sort, in which we
ignorant men have dealings with each other.  With regard to the
latter, there is no doubt that I ought to make return to the giver, no
matter what sort of a man he may be, whether he has turned out to be a
murderer or a thief or an adulterer.  Crimes have their appointed
laws; let such men be reformed rather by a judge than by the
ingrate. {judge_not+} Let no man make you bad because he is.  To a
good man I shall hand back his benefit, to a bad one I shall fling it
back; to the former, because I am indebted to him, to the latter, in
order that I may no longer be indebted to him. With regard to the
other kind of benefit, a question arises, for, if I could not have
received the benefit unless I had been a wise man, neither can I
return it to the giver unless he is a wise man.  For you say :
"Suppose that I do return it - he is not able to take it have
returned; I owe protection to a benefit that has been received, not to
one that has been returned.  While it is in my hands, it must be kept
safe; but I must give it back when he demands it even if it escapes
from his hands as he takes it.  To a good man I shall make return when
it is convenient; to a bad man, when he asks for it.

"You cannot," you say, "return to him the same sort of benefit that
you received; for you received it from a wise man, you are returning
it to a fool." No; I am returning to him the sort that he is now able
to receive, and it is not my fault if that which I shall return is
inferior to what I received, but the fault lies with him, and if he is
restored to wisdom, I shall return the sort that I received; while he
lingers in evil, I shall return the sort that he is able to receive.

"Tell me," you say, "if he has become, not only bad, but savage, even
ferocious, like Apollodorus or Phalaris, will you return even to such
a man a benefit that you had received?" {Timon+} Nature does not
permit a wise man to suffer so great a change.  A man does not fall
from the best state into the worst; even a bad man must necessarily
retain some traces of good; virtue is never so wholly extinguished as
not to leave upon the mind indelible imprints that no change can ever
erase. Wild beasts that have been bred in captivity, if they escape
into the forests, retain something of their earlier tameness, and are
as far removed from the most peaceful beasts as they are from those
that have always been wild and have never submitted to the hand of
man.  No one who has ever adhered to wisdom can fall into the depths
of wickedness; its colour is too deeply fixed to be able to fade
altogether from his mind and to take on the hue of evil.

In the second place, I ask you whether the man you are thinking of is
ferocious in spirit only, or whether he bursts forth into acts of
public violence?  You have cited the cases of Phalaris and another
tyrant, but if, while an evil man possesses their nature, he keeps it
concealed, why should I not return to him his benefit in order that
there may be no further bond between him and me?  If, however, he not
only delights in human blood, but feeds upon it; if also he exercises
his insatiable cruelty in the torture of persons of all ages, and his
frenzy is the result, not of anger, but of a certain delight in
cruelty; if he butchers children before the eyes of their parents; if,
not content with simply killing his victims, he tortures them, and not
only burns, but roasts, them to death; if his castle is always wet
with freshly shed blood -then not to return a benefit to him is too
small a thing!  For whatever the tie that bound him to me, it has been
severed by his breach of the common bond of humanity. {common_bond+}
If he had bestowed something upon me, and yet bore arms against my
country, he would have lost all claim upon me, and it would be
considered a crime to repay him with gratitude.  If he does not assail
my country, but is the bane of his own, and, while he keeps aloof from
my own people, harrows and rends his own, nevertheless, even if such
depravity does not make him my personal enemy, it makes him hateful to
me, and regard for the duty that I owe to the whole human race is, in
my eyes, more primary and more pressing than the duty I owe to a
single man. {common_bond+}
 
But, although this be so -, although I am free to act as I please
toward him, from the moment when by violating all law he put himself
beyond the pale of the law, I shall think that I ought to observe
moderation, as follows.  If my benefit to him is likely neither to
increase his powers to work general harm, nor to strengthen what he
already has, if, too, it shall be of such a character that it can be
returned to him without being disastrous to the state, then I shall
return it.  I shall be willing to save the life of his infant son -
for what harm can this benefit do to any of those whom he tortures
with his cruelty? - but I shall not supply him with money to maintain
his bodyguard. If he desires marbles and raiments, these trappings of
his luxury will do nobody any harm; but I shall not furnish him with
soldiers and arms. If, as a great boon, he asks for stage-players and
prostitutes and things that will soften {Paris+} his fierce nature, I
shall gladly present them. I would not send to him triremes and
bronze-beaked ships, but I should send pleasure- boats and yachts
and the other playthings of kings who indulge in sport on the sea.
And if his sanity should be despaired of, with the hand that returns a
benefit to him, I shall bestow one on all men; since for such
characters the only remedy is death, and, if a man will probably never
return to his senses, it is best for him to depart.  But so rare is
such a degree of wickedness that it is always regarded as a portent -
as much so as the yawning of the earth and the bursting forth of fires
from the caverns of the sea.  So let us leave it, and talk of vices
that we can detest without shuddering.

As for the type of bad man that I can find in any market- place, who
is feared, but only by individuals, I shall return to him the benefit
that I have received.  It is not right that I should profit by his
wickedness; let me return what is not mine to its owner.  What
difference does it make whether he is good or bad?  But I would sift
out that matter most carefully if I were giving, not returning, a
benefit.  This point calls up a story.  A certain Pythagorean once
bought some white shoes from a cobbler, a fine pair, without paying
for them in cash.  Some days later he returned to the shop in order to
make payment, and, after he had been knocking for a long time at the
closed door, someone appeared, and said: "Why do you waste your time?
The Cobbler you are looking for passed away, and has been cremated;
this is, perhaps, a grief to us, who believe that we lose our friends
for ever, but not to you, who know that they will be reborn," jeering
at the Pythagorean. But our philosopher, not unwillingly, carried
his three or four denarii back home, shaking them now and then in his
hand.  Later, after blaming himself for the secret pleasure he had had
from not paying the money, and perceiving that he had derived
satisfaction from his trifling gain, he returned to the same shop,
saying to himself: "For you the man is alive, pay him what you owe."
Thereupon, he dropped the four coins into the shop, thrusting them
through the closed door by means of a crack in the joining, and
exacted punishment of himself for his unconscionable greed in order
that he might not form the habit of being in debt.

Try to find someone to whom you can pay what you owe, and, if no one
demands it, do you dun yourself.  It is no concern of yours whether
the man is good or bad; first pay, then accuse.  You have forgotten
how your several duties have been divided - for him forgetfulness is
enjoined, for you we have decreed remembrance.  Yet it is a mistake to
suppose that, when we say that the man who has given a benefit ought
to forget, we would rob him of all memory of his act, especially if it
was a very honourable one.  We overstate some rules in order that in
the end they may reach their true value.  When we say: "He must not
remember," we really mean: "He must not babble, nor boast+, nor give
offence." For some men in all gatherings tell of a benefit that they
have given; talk of it when they are sober, make no secret of it when
they are drunk, force it upon strangers, confide it to friends.  It is
to quell this excessive and reprehensible consciousness of it that we
have said that the man who gives must forget, and, by ordering
something more than he is able to accomplish, have commended to him
silence.

Whenever you lack confidence in those to whom you are giving orders,
you should demand of them more than is necessary in order that they
may perform all that is necessary.  The set purpose of all hyperbole
is to arrive at the truth by falsehood.  And so when the poet said:

> Whose whiteness shamed the snow, their speed the winds,

he stated what could not possibly be true in order to give credence to
all that could be true.  And the other who said:

> Firmer than a rock, more headlong than the stream,

did not suppose that he could convince
anyone by this that any person was as immovable as a rock.  Hyperbole
never expects to attain all that it ventures, but asserts the
incredible in order to arrive at the credible. When we say: "Let him
who gives a benefit forget it," we mean: "Let him seem to have
forgotten it; let not his memory of it appear or obtrude." When we say
that we ought not to demand the repayment of a benefit, we do not
banish every demand for repayment; for bad men often need to be
dunned, even good men to be reminded.  What, then?  Am I not to point
out an opportunity to one who is not aware of it?  Am I not to reveal
my own wants?  Why should anyone have the chance to deny or be sorry
that he did not know of them?  Sometimes we may venture to remind, but
modestly, with no air of making a demand or of claiming a legal right.

Socrates once said in the hearing of his friends: "I would have bought
a cloak, if I had had the money." He asked from no one, he reminded
all.  Rivalry sprang up as to who should be allowed to give it to him.
Why should there not have been?  For how small a thing it was that
Socrates was receiving!  But to have been the one from whom Socrates
received was a great thing.  Could he have upbraided them more gently?
"I would have bought a cloak," he said, "if I had had the money."
After this, whoever made haste to give, gave too late; he had already
failed in duty to Socrates.  Because some men are harsh in demanding
repayment, we forbid it, not in order that the demand may never be
made, but that it may be made sparingly.

Once when Aristippus was enjoying the odour of a perfume, he cried:
"Curses upon these effeminate fellows who have cast discredit on so
nice a thing!" So, too, we should exclaim: "Curses upon these un
conscionable and importunate magnifiers of their benefits who have
banished so nice a thing as the right of one friend to remind
another!" I, however, shall make use of this privilege of friendship,
and I shall ask the return of a benefit from anyone from whom I would
have asked a benefit, who will be ready to accept as a second benefit
the opportunity of returning the first.  Not even when complaining of
him would I ever say

> Needy I found him, a wretch, cast up on the shore

> And, cool, the half of my kingdom I made his store.

This is not to remind, but to
reproach; this is to make a benefit hateful, this is to give a man
either the right, or the pleasure, of being ungrateful. It would be
enough, and more than enough, to refresh his memory with the gentle
and friendly words:

> If I to you by aught have help or pleasure brought

and he, in turn, would say: "Brought me help? 'Needy you
found me, a wretch, cast up on the shore!'"

"But," you say, "if we gain nothing; if he dissembles if he forgets -
what ought I to do?" You now bring up the very pressing question,
which will fittingly complete our subject, of how we are to deal with
the ungrateful.  I answer, deal calmly, gently, magnanimously. Never
let anyone's discourtesy, forgetfulness, and ingratitude offend you so
much that you will not, after all, be glad that you gave; never let
the injustice of it drive vou into saying "I wish that I had not done
it."  You should find pleasure even in the mischance of your benefit;
the ingrate will always regret it if you do not even now egret it!
There is no reason why you should be exasperated as if something
strange had happened; you ought rather to have been surprised if it
had not happened. One balks at the trouble, another at the expense,
another at the danger, another is deterred by false shame, since
returning the benefit would be an admission that he had received it,
another by ignorance of his duty, another by laziness, another by the
engrossments of business.  See how greedy are men's desires and always
asking for more!  You need not wonder that no one makes return in a
world where no one is satisfied.  Who of men is of so firm and
dependable a mind that you can safely deposit your benefits with him?
{motives_list+} One is crazed by lust, another is the slave of his
belly; another is wholly engrossed with gain and considers, not the
means, but the amount, of it; another struggles with envy, another
with blind ambition that drives him to the sword.  Consider, too,
mental sluggishness and senility, and opposed to them, the perpetual
turmoil and commotion of the restless heart.  Consider, too, excessive
self-esteem and swollen pride in the things for which a man should be
despised.  And what shall I say of the obstinate persistence in
wrongdoing, what of the fickleness that is always leaping from one
thing to another?  Add to these the headlong rashness, the fear that
is never ready to give faithful counsel, and the thousand errors in
which we are entangled the audacity of the greatest of cowards, the
discord of the greatest of friends, and the universal evil of trusting
in everything that is most uncertain, and of disdaining the
possessions that once we had no hope of ever being able to attain.  In
the company of the most restless passions do you hope to find that
calmest of qualities, good faith+?

If a true picture of our life should be flashed before your mind, you
would think that you were seeing the representation of a city that had
just been stormed, in which all regard for decency and right had been
abandoned and only force holds sway, as if the word had gone out to
cause universal confusion.  Fire is not idle, the sword is not idle;
all crime is free from the law; not even religion, which has protected
its suppliants in the midst of a hostile invasion, affords any check
upon those rushing to seize plunder.  This one strips a private house,
this one a public building, this one a sacred place, this one a place
profane; this one breaks down, this one leaps over; this one, not
content with a narrow path, overthrows the very walls that block his
way, and reaches his booty over ruins; one ravages without murdering,
another bears his spoils in a hand stained with blood; everyone
carries off something that belongs to another.

O! you have too easily forgotten the common lot, if, in this greed of
the human race, you seek to find among these plunderers even one who
brings back!  If you are indignant that men are ungrateful, be
indignant that they are sybaritic, indignant that they are greedy,
indignant that they are shameless, indignant that the sick are
unsightly, that the old are pale!  This is, indeed, a heinous vice, it
is intolerable - one that sets men at variance, that rends and
destroys the harmony {social_glue+} which props our human weakness,
but it is so common {nobody's_perfect+} that not even he who complains
of it escapes it.  Ask your secret soul whether you have always repaid
gratitude to those to whom you owed it, whether no one's kindness has
ever been wasted on you, whether the memory of all your benefits lives
ever in you.  You will find that those you received as a boy slipped
from your memory before you were a youth, those that were bestowed in
your early manhood have not survived into old age.  Some we have lost,
some we have thrown away, some have gradually slipped from our sight,
from some we have turned away our eyes.  In order to excuse your
weakness, I might say that the memory is a very frail vessel, and is
not strong enough to hold a mass of things; it must necessarily lose
to the extent that it receives, and the newest impressions crowd out
the oldest.  Thus it is that your nurse has least influence over you
because the passing years have left her benefit in the long ago; thus
it is that you have no longer any veneration for your teacher; so it
happens that now, when you are occupied with your election to the
consulship or your candidature for the priesthood, you have lost all
memory of the voter who gave you the quaestorship.  Perhaps, if you
search carefully, you will find in your own bosom the vice of which
you complain. {Common_Humanity+} It is unfair for you to be angry with
a universal failing, foolish to be angry with your own - you must
pardon if you would win pardon. {judge_not+} You will make a man
better by bearing with him, certainly worse by reproaching him.  There
is no reason why you should harden him in effrontery; let him keep
what little shame he has.  Too loud reproaches often hurry wavering
probity to its fall.  No man shrinks from being what he appears to be;
he loses his sense of shame by being found out.  "I have wasted my
benefit," you say.  Can we ever say that we have wasted the things
that we have hallowed?  But a benefit that has been well bestowed,
even if we have ill return for it, is one of the hallowed things.  He
is not the kind of man we hoped he was; unlike him, let us be the kind
we have always been.  Your loss did not occur at the time of his
ingratitude - it then simply became evident.  A man is not revealed as
ungrateful without bringing shame on us, since, in fact, to complain
of the loss of a benefit is proof that it was not well bestowed. As
far as we can, we ought to plead his case before our own bar: "Perhaps
he was not able, perhaps he was unaware, perhaps he will still do so."
Some accounts have been made good by a long-suffering and wise
creditor who has kept them alive and nursed them by waiting.  We ought
to do the same; let us strengthen a weak sense of good faith.  "I have
wasted my benefit," you say.  You fool, you do not understand when
your loss took place!  You wasted it, but at the time you gave it;
{no_strings+} the fact has only now been revealed.  Even in the case
of those which seem to have been wasted, forbearance is often most
valuable; the cankers of the mind, as of the body, must be handled
tenderly.  The string that might have been untied by patience is often
snapped by a violent pull.  What need is there of abuse? Of
complaints?  Of reproaches?  Why do you free him from obligation?  Why
do you let him go?  Even if he is ungrateful, he owes you nothing
after this.  What sense is there in exasperating one upon whom you
have bestowed great favours, with the result that from being a
doubtful friend he will become an undoubted enemy, and will seek to
protect himself by defaming you, nor will gossip fail to say: "I do
not know why he could not put up with one to whom he owed so much;
there is something at the bottom of it"?  Any man, even if he does not
stain, asperses the reputation of a superior by complaining of him;
and no one is content to trump up light accusations, since he seeks to
win belief by the very magnitude of his lie.

How much better the course that will preserve a semblance of
friendship with him, and, if he returns to his senses, even
friendship!  Persistent goodness wins over bad men, and no one of them
is so hard-hearted and hostile to kindly treatment as not to love a
good man even while they wrong him, when even the fact that they can
fail to pay with impunity is made an additional source of indebtedness
to him. {forgive+} And so let your thoughts follow this trend: "He has
not repaid me with gratitude; what shall I do?  Do as the gods, those
glorious authors of all things, do; they begin to give benefits to him
who knows them not, and persist in giving them to those who are
ungrateful.  Some reproach them with indifference to us, others with
injustice; some place them outside of their world, and abandon them
to sloth and languor, leaving them without light, without any task;
others call the sun, to whom we owe the division of our hours of work
and rest, and our escape from being plunged into darkness and the
chaos of eternal night, who by his course regulates the seasons,
nourishes our bodies, calls forth the crops, and ripens the fruits,
merely a mass of stone or a fortuitous collection of fiery particles -
anything rather than a god.  Yet, none the less, like the best of
parents, who only smile at the spiteful words of their children, the
gods do not cease to heap their benefits upon those who are doubtful
about the source of benefits, but distribute their blessings, among
the nations and peoples with unbroken uniformity.  Possessing only the
power of doing good, they sprinkle the lands with timely rains, they
stir the seas with their blasts, they mark off the seasons by the
course of the stars, they modify the extremes of summer and winter by
interposing periods of milder temperature, and, ever gentle and
kindly, bear with the errors of our feeble spirits. {Nature+} Let us
imitate them; let us give, even if many of our gifts have been given
in vain; none the less, let us give to still others, nay, even to
those at whose hands we have suffered loss.  The destruction of one
house deters no one from erecting another, and, when fire has swept
away our household gods, we lay new foundations while the ground is
still hot, and over and over we entrust new cities to the same spot
that has swallowed up others; so persistently does the mind foster
fair hopes+.  Men would cease their operations on land and sea unless
they had been willing to renew the attempts that had failed. xxx"If a
man is ungrateful, he has done, not me, but himself, an injury; I had
the fruit of my benefit when I gave it. {give_freely+} And the
experience will make me, not slower to give, but more careful in
giving; what I have lost in the case of one man, I shall recover from
others.  But even to him I shall give a second benefit, and, even as a
good farmer overcomes the sterility of his ground by care and
cultivation, I shall be victor; my benefit is lost to me, he is lost
to mankind.  It is no proof of a fine spirit to give a benefit and
lose it; the proof of a fine spirit is to lose and still to give!"
